Genetics
SS 2022
Wörter mit * stehen hinten im Vokabelverzeichnis
Inhalt
Genetics 1...........................................................................................................................................2
Genetics 2.........................................................................................................................................10
Genetics 3.........................................................................................................................................19
Genetics 4.........................................................................................................................................26
Genetics 5.........................................................................................................................................34
Genetics 6.........................................................................................................................................43
Genetics 7.........................................................................................................................................56
Genetics 8.........................................................................................................................................62
Genetics 9.........................................................................................................................................69
Genetics 10.......................................................................................................................................75
Genetics 11.......................................................................................................................................81
Genetics 12.......................................................................................................................................88
Genetics 13.......................................................................................................................................92
Genetics 14.....................................................................................................................................100
Vocabulary......................................................................................................................................107
Ich übernehme keine Garantie für die Richtigkeit dieser Zusammenfassung. Der Großteil der Bilder
stammen aus der Vorlesung. Ich besitze keine Rechte an diesen.
2
Genetics 1
Definition
Genetics from the Greek “génesis” which means origin deals with the principles and physical
foundations of heritable traits and the transmission (inheritance) of heritable dispositions (genes) to
the next generation.
Areas of Genetics
• Classical/Formal Genetics: How are characteristics (traits) inherited, what are genes made
of?
• Cytogenetics: What are the cellular/chromosomal foundations of inheritance?
• Molecular Genetics/Genomics: Which gene acts on which characteristic? How is the
expression of characteristics regulated?
• Developmental Genetics: How do genes direct the development of an organism?
• Applied Genetics: Clinical Genetics (Genetics of diseases), Genetics of plant and animal
breeding
• Population Genetics: How do genes direct the evolution of populations or species?
History of Genetics
Pre-scientific era
Even in the pre-scientific era certain regularities were noticed in the inheritance of traits. During
sexual reproduction both traits of the species and individual traits from both parents are handed
down to progeny*. Species traits reappear constantly in every generation, whereas individual traits
vary within certain limits and occur seemingly erratically* (e.g., hair colour). Some heritable traits
may skip generations and reappear only later in offspring. During clonal propagation* (e.g., via
shoots or budding), however, both species traits and individual traits remain constant over
generations.
The intra-specific variability of traits is the basis of natural selection. This
variability was also used for artificial selection of useful plants and animals by
humans in prehistoric times and early history by allowing the reproduction of
individuals with desired traits (seeds of best individuals: reproduce, rest:
cooking pot). The domestication and breeding of cattle, sheep and goats was at
around 8000 BC and cultured wheat at around 8000-6000 BC. For example, the
Assyrians performed artificial pollination of date palms (manual pollination of
the stamina).
Early questions pertaining* to the material foundation of inheritance
Hippokrates and Aristoteles explained inheritance as the mixing of body fluids. Offspring inherits
traits from 2 parents in arbitrary portions without recognizable rules due to random mixing of body
fluids. 300-1600 AC the concepts were mostly influenced by religion, e.g., the Preformation Theory
by Nicholas Hartsoeker (1694): sperm contains a preformed embryo, which then matures and
undergoes modifications in the womb.
Beginnings of Genetics
Genetics as a science began in the 17th
-19th century. William Harvey (after 1600) stated the theory of
Epigenesis (an organism develops from a fertilized egg). Schleiden and Schwann (1830) made the
cellular theory. All organisms consist of cells, which, in turn developed from cells. Proof came by
Louis Pasteur: only living cells create living cells. Rudolf Virchov put it 1855 in a nutshell “Omnis
cellula e cellula”. Gregor Mendel recognized 1865 the particulate nature of genes despite the
3
seemingly blurred distinction between most parental forms of traits. He introduced quantitative
methods and is the founder of the scientific approach to Genetics.
Mutation – The cause of trait variability
Carl von Linné observed a mutated Linaria vulgaris (toadflax*; 1749). Hugo de Vries observed a
mutant Oenothera lamarckiana (evening primrose*; 1904). He coined the term “mutation”. Thomas
Hunt Morgan searched for mutations in Drosophila (1910). A fly had white eyes instead of red ones.
Hermann Muller inducted* mutations by X-rays (1927).
The discovery of mutation and the laws of inheritance enabled the development of the present-day
Evolutionary Theory. Lyell (1830) found fossils that testified the existence of other, more primitive
creatures in ancient times. Where does this diversity come from? People believed that species are
static and were created by God. Lamarck stated that the changes in creatures and the origin of
diversity is a result of the inheritance of adaptation to the environment (e.g., giraffes must stretch
the neck). Darwin found out that species are not unchanging and that they evolve by natural
selection (1809). He wrote that in his book “On the origin of species”. That contradicted religious
believes and the spontaneous origin of novel species by mutations. The Synthetic (from synthesis)
Evolution Theory (1940ies) stated that random mutations produce novel traits that are inherited
according to Mendel´s laws. Selection of different traits causes continuous change and diversity of
creatures.
Chromosomes and DNA are the carriers of heritable factors
• Robert Brown (1828): description of the cell nucleus and chromosomes
• Oskar Hertwig (1876): observation of the process of fertilization in sea urchin eggs
• O. Hertwig and Theodor Boveri (1890): postulation of a reductional division preceding the
formation of gametes
• T. Boveri (1892): description of the reductional division (meiosis (in a roundworm*))
• T. Boveri (1889-1895): showing by the fertilization of de-nucleated sea urchin eggs that the
heritable information is contained in the nucleus
• Edmund Wilson (1896): postulation that chromosomes behave as expected of the carriers of
Mendel´s heritable traits
• Correns, von Tschermak, de Vries (1900): re-discovery of Mendel´s laws
• Walter Sutton (1903): confirmation that the thesis that heritable traits are located on
chromosomes. In cell nuclei of grasshoppers exist 2 identical sets of chromosomes →
Chromosome Theory of Inheritance
• Alfred H. Sturtevant, Thomas H. Morgan (1911): assigned genes to a particular chromosome
in Drosophila
Frederick Griffith discovered bacterial transformation (1928): genes are a substance, which can pass
from cells to other cells. He made an experiment in which non-virulent bacteria (Streptococcus
pneumoniae) transformed into
virulent forms. The transferred
factor is definitely not just a
component of the envelope of IS,
which is incorporated by IIR, but it
becomes a permanent part of the
heritable makeup of IIR because
they now become infectious IS
cells.
4
Are DNA or proteins the carriers of heritable information?
The original notion in 1935 was that DNA was a simple, uniform molecule. Contrasted by protein as a
polymer that can consist of amino acids in arbitrary sequence, hence appearing appropriate as the
carrier of complex information. An average polypeptide of 200 amino acids can have 20200 different
sequences. This is an astronomic figure, considering the estimated number of atoms in the visible
Universe being 1080 to 1083
.
Indirect hints at DNA as the hereditary substance
Firstly, mitochondria and chloroplasts are, besides the nucleus, carriers of
heritable traits. They too possess DNA. Other organelles don´t. Secondly,
gametes have half as much DNA as somatic cells. This ratio does not hold for
proteins. Thus, only DNA meets the postulation that fertilization combines 2
equal sets of hereditary material in a cell. Thirdly, UV radiation has its
strongest mutagenetic effect at a wavelength of 260nm. This is the absorption
maximum of DNA and RNA. Protein absorbs maximally at 280nm. This
mutations upon the 260nm UV are caused by changes at DNA. In the table there
is the DNA content (in pictograms) of sperm cells (haploid – n) and somatic cells
(diploid – 2n).
Oswald Avery, MacLeod and McCarty discovered that DNA is
the carrier of genes (1944). They lysed an S strain (forms
smooth colonies) of Streptococcus and enzymatically
destroyed proteins and RNA or DNA in the cell lysate. Upon
digestion by DNase (DNA degrading enzyme) the
transformation of an R strain (rough colonies) was no longer
possible → the ability of Streptococcus to form a
polysaccharide envelope (smooth colonies and pathogenicity)
is transferred to the non-pathogenic strain by DNA. The image shows a simplified depiction of the
experiment.
Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase confirmed 1953 that
DNA is the carrier of genes. Bacteriophages were
propagated* in bacteria, which were grown in media with
radioactive components of proteins and nucleic acids
respectively. This created phages, whose nucleic acids
(
32P) or proteins (35S) were labelled. Infection of bacteria
with such phages showed that only labelled DNA entered
bacteria, and labelled DNA, unlike labelled protein, was incorporated by the following generation of
phages.
Watson and Crick reported 1953 the double-helical structure of DNA based on X-ray structural
analysis by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklins.
Basics of inheritance
Due to the double structure of the DNA, each single strand carries the complete information and can
produce an identical duplicate (semi conservative replication) and during transcription, information is
read from single strands.
Chargaff´s rules of DNA base parity
First rule: A and T as well as G and C have a 1:1 ratio (A/T = 1, G/C = 1). This is to be expected because
of the A-T and G-C base pairing.
Second rule: in single strands, A and T are roughly equally frequent and G and C are roughly equally
frequent (A/T ~ 1, G/C ~ 1). This is to be expected if two strands of a DNA are equal (with respect to
encoding genes).
5
Chargaff´s rules apply to the genomes of eukaryotes and prokaryotes and
viruses with double-stranded DNA. They don´t apply to single-stranded
virus DNA and RNA and the second rule does not apply to mitochondrial
DNA and plastid RNA. The GC:AT ratio of DNA can deviate from a 1:1 ratio
and in fact, does so most often. DNA of most organisms are AT-rich.
The central dogma of the flow of genetic information
Information is transferred from DNA to RNA
and from RNA to proteins. However, there
are important exceptions (e.g., RNA viruses
and the elongation of chromosome ends,
where DNA is synthesized using RNA as a
template). This process is called reverse
transcription. Francis Crick postulated RNA as intermediate carrier of information because it is found
both in the nucleus (where information is stored) and in cytoplasm (where proteins are synthesized).
Confirmation came from the isolation of ribosomes with RNA bound to them.
From DNA to protein
There are 20 different amino acids. A trio of 4 DNA bases (triplets) encodes one amino acid. The DNA
sequence has three times as many elements as the corresponding protein sequence.
The genetic code
The genetic code has many properties. It is linear, i.e., information is contained as a sequence of
bases in mRNA. Each “word” consists of three ribonucleotides, hence triplet-code. The code is
unique, i.e., each triplet carries the information for only one amino acid. The genetic code is
redundant, i.e., a certain amino acid can be encoded by different DNA/RNA-sequence-triplets. The
code contains a start-triplet and usually 3 stop-triplets, which start and terminate translation
respectively. The code is read as a continuous string of characters without a separation between
triplets, it is comma-less. The code is universal. The same triplets encode the same amino acids in all
organisms (in rare exceptions (mitochondria, ciliates*, mycoplasma), one of the stop codons is
interpreted as an amino acid, or a different triplet serves as a stop codon. Even more uncommon is
the encoding of a different amino acid by a certain triplet).
6
Base triplets form a string of characters
without punctuation. 1 mutation can
destroy the whole protein.
Uncovering the triplet nature of the
genetic code
Theoretical consideration by Francis
Crick: 4 bases can encode the
information for only 4 amino acids.
Groups of 2 bases encode 16, groups of
3 encode 64 which is necessary for 20
amino acids. A series of experiments
were done by Crick, Barnett, Brenner
and Watts-Tobin (1961) on the
mutation of phages. Proflavine was
inserted between bases which changed their distances and caused the
insertion or loss of bases during replication. This can cause a shift of all
consecutive bases (frameshift). Phages undergoing such a mutation can no
longer infect certain bacterial strains. It was found, however, that the loss or
addition of bases by subsequent additional mutations can reverse this defect.
If the number of bases is reset to the original or increased or decreased by 3.
While this may cause the change of one or several amino acids, it restores the
correct reading frame (and the full functionality in many cases).
The big question is: Which triplet encodes which amino acid?
Unravelling the genetic code
In vitro synthesis of poly-phenylalanine by Nirenberg and
Matthaei was done in 1961. Synthesis of polyphenylalanine by the translation of an uracilhomopolymer disclosed the first triplet amino acid code.
Then mixed co-polymers were made. mRNA sequences with
certain proportions of bases in random order were
synthesized. The abundance of certain amino acids in the
resulting polypeptides led to the identification of additional
codes.
Calculation of expected frequencies of various triplets in a
mixed co-polymer 5C:1A. E.g.: 0,4% of triplets will be AAA.
Less than 1% lysine was synthesized. Therefore: AAA →
Lys. AAC, ACA, and CAA each have a probability of 2,3%.
Glutamine and asparagine each were represented by 2% in
the polypeptide. Therefore it is likely that they are encoded
by one of these triplets. 57,9% of triplets will be CCC. 6,9%
of triplets will contain 2A + 1C. 69% of amino acids of the
polypeptide were proline. Thus, proline is probably
encoded by CCC and a triplet with 2A and 1C and so on.
The triplet binding assay (discovered by Nirenberg and
Leder) is another method for the assignment of codons.
With this technique, ribosomes bind in vitro to a single codon of 3 nucleotides. This triplet behaves
like a codon in mRNA and interacts with an anti-codon-sequence in tRNA. The RNA ribosome
complex was then isolated, and the amino acid bound to it was determined.
Finally, it was possible to synthetize long RNAs with Di-, Tri-, and Tetranucleotide repeats. By in vitro
translation additional codon assignments and stop codons were determined.
7
Codon usage
Different species use codons at different frequencies. Codon usage plays an important role in gene
regulation. Rarely used codons within a gene sequence can slow down translation, whereas
frequently used codons can promote it. In the
table is the codon usage of alanine. Different
codon usage by different organisms is related
to different abundance of the corresponding
tRNAs.
Exeptions from the universal code
Most ciliates have only 1 translation-stop
codon. 2 species do not have a dedicated
stop triplet at all. Triplets UAA, UAG or
UGA may either encode an amino acid or
serve as the stop, dependent on whether
they locate somewhere inside the mRNA
sequence or close to its end (near the
poly-A tail).
From DNA sequence to protein sequence
Both DNA strands are coding. For a particular gene, one strand is
coding, the other is the template. mRNA is read from the template
strand. Therefore, its sequence equals the coding strand sequence.
Transfer RNA (tRNA)
tRNA-molecules normally consist of 73 to 95 nucleotides. Pairing of
some of the bases causes the typical clover leaf* construction. Up to
20% of bases in mRNA are present in modified forms (e.g., as
methylguanine (Gm)). In addition, there are some other modified bases
such as pseudouridine (Ψ) in the shown example of RNA for
phenylalanine. Even thymidine (in RNA normally replaced by U) can
appear. Translation of all 51 amino acid-coding triplets requires 31
different tRNAs.
Code redundency reduces 61 triplets to 20 amino acids.
8
Definitions
• Genetics (Bateson 1905) from the Greek genesis = origin; the science of inheritance
• Gene (historical definition by Johannsen 1909): a heritable factor that influences a heritable
trait. A gene resides at a fixed place (locus) on a chromosome.
• Trait: heritable property, e.g., flower colour, handedness*, coat texture
• Form of trait: e.g., red, lefthanded, curly
• Allele: 1 of several forms of a gene. Different alleles are mutually exclusive genetic markers
and originate from gene mutations. An allele encodes a distinct form of trait
• Genome (Winkler 1920): term for, dependent on the context, the whole DNA or geneencoding portion of the DNA of an organism
• Genotype: the entirety of genetic information carried by an organism
• Phenotype: the observable structural and functional properties of an organism, which are
dependent on both its genetical potential (genotype) and the environment
• Gene pool: the whole genetic information that is stored in all alleles of all genes of a sexually
reproducing population
Definitions of a gene
The historical definition (from Johannsen) is that a gene is a heritable factor that influences a
heritable trait, which roughly means 1 gene = 1 trait. The genetical definition (Benzer 1957) is that a
gene is a region on a DNA or
RNA, which encodes a specific
trait and is not genetically
separable (cistron). Mutations
within a cistron cannot
complement each other → 1
gene = 1 trait is not always valid.
Uncovering the genetic code led to molecular definitions:
1. A gene is a sequence of bases on DNA, which is translated into a sequence of amino acids (1
gene = 1 protein) – not true to new definitions
2. A gene is a DNA sequence, which is responsible for the formation of a RNA
3. A gene is a specific sequence of nucleotides along a DNA (or RNA) molecule, which is
responsible for a heritable trait.
This is the most comprehensive definition. It categorizes genes as such that encode polypeptides
(structural genes), genes that are transcribed but not translated (e.g., tRNA and rRNA genes), and
genes whose function does not require their transcription (e.g., sequences needed for transcription
regulation)
9
Only a fraction of the human genome encodes proteins
The translation of DNA into a protein sequence is not precisely 1:1
mRNA and even amino acids may be modified after transcription or translation by the activity of
other genes or enzymes in a way that their sequences deviate from the base sequence on the DNA.
10
Genetics 2
The transmission of hereditary material to daughter cells
Mitosis produces 2 cells with the same chromosome number as the progenitor* cell (2n in diploid
organisms). Meiosis produces cells with half of the chromosome number of the progenitor cell.
Meiosis is essential for the production of gametes. During mitosis and meiosis, chromosomes appear
as compact structures with densely packed DNA. In non-dividing interphase-cells, hereditary material
is present in an uncoiled form as chromatin.
The division of chromosomes (mitosis)
The function of mitosis is the transmission of identical
hereditary information to 2 daughter cells. The partition of
genetic material is a multiple step process (image on the
right). A chromatid is half a chromosome.
Mitotic cell divisions lead to clonal (vegetative)
multiplication (proliferation) on unicellular organisms and
the growth (from zygote to adult) in multicellular organisms. Human adults develop from ~44 division
steps of a zygote. Mitotic cell division does also cell regeneration in some organs and wound healing.
Mitosis is a characteristic feature of eukaryotes
In prokaryotes (bacteria, archaea), the genome is not separated from the rest of the
cell by a membrane, i.e., they don´t have a nucleus and they don´t possess
membrane-bound organelles. Their genetic material is a long (mostly) ring-shaped
DNA molecule which is strongly entangled in a subregion of the cell, the nucleoid.
DNA is not further packaged during division. The division of prokaryotes is not
called mitosis because it is lacking some characteristics. These are the packaging
and shortening of chromosomes, the involvement of a spindle apparatus and the
functional separation of the genome and the cell.
The stages of mitosis
• Prophase: centrioles (only in animals and fungi) divide and migrate to
opposite positions on the nuclear surface. The nuclear envelope and
the nucleolus dissolve. Chromosomes compact and become visible.
• Prometaphase: spindle fibres attach to centrosome (kinetochores)
and move chromosomes toward the cell equator.
• Metaphase: the centrosomes of chromosomes are assembled at the
“equatorial plate”. Chromosomes are maximally shortened and their
composition of 2 parallel sister chromatids being connected at the
centromeres can be recognized.
• Anaphase: the connection at centrosomes is released and the
chromatids migrate to opposite poles.
• Telophase: chromatids have arrived at the poles. A new envelope
forms around the 2 (now daughter) nuclei. Chromosomes despiralize
and a new nucleus is formed.
The mitotic spindle
Definition centromere and kinetochore. The centromere is the chromosomal region where
microtubules attach and move the chromosome during the division. It appears as a constriction in
the chromosome. The kinetochore is the protein complex at the centromere, which is necessary for
11
microtubule attachment and movement. Microtubules are stiff.
They shorten and lengthen by polymerisation and
depolymerisation.
The spindle apparatus
Fibre bundles of molecules are arranged in the shape of a spindle
during cell divisions. Microtubules consist of dimers of α and β
tubulin. They do not contract elastically. The spindle apparatus
consists of kinetochore fibres, astral fibres, and polar fibres.
Kinetochore fibres extend between poles (no centrosomes and
centrioles in plants) and the kinetochores. The elongation of kinetochore fibres during prometaphase
pushes chromosomes towards the cellular equator whereas their shortening and sliding along each
other during anaphase pulls chromatids to the poles. Astral fibres anchor the spindle apparatus
within the cell. Polar fibres counteract the pulling force of kinetochore fibres and push poles apart.
This causes the separation of chromatids not only by the shortening of the kinetochore fibres
(anaphase A) but also by the increase of distance between the poles and the kinetochores attached
to them (anaphase B).
Mechanisms of chromosome movement
During prometaphase chromosomes are pushed (not only at kinetochores)
towards the equator, by microtubules polymerizing at plus-ends and by MTassociated motor proteins. During anaphase chromosomes are pulled by
depolymerization of microtubules (MT) at kinetochores (1), by the movement of
kinetochore fibres along other MTs by MT-associated motor proteins (2) and by
pushing apart the poles (3). It is important that this step is done correctly to avoid
aneuploidies. MT-associated motor proteins are minus-end directed (e.g.,
dyneins) or plus-end directed (kinesins). If chromosomes would not
separate the cell wall would be pulled to the centre.
Cohesion* and segregation of chromatids
The cohesion of sister chromatids (half chromosomes) and the temporally well controlled loss of
sister chromatid cohesion are necessary for the coordinated separation (segregation) of all
chromatids of the cell. Cohesion along chromosome arms in prophase, whereas cohesion between
centromeres is resolved at beginning anaphase. Chromatids must separate only when they are
bound via MTs to opposite poles. Otherwise, chromatids could mis-segregate. Cohesion is caused by
the entanglement of replicated DNA molecules (DNA catenation*) and complexes of cohesion
proteins (cohesins).
Cohesin and condensin
Cohesin and condensin are related ring-shaped protein complexes of a
similar composition. They are important for the chromosome structure.
Condensin rings surround the chromatin thread and bend it into loops.
This contributes to the shortening (condensation) of the chromosomes
during mitosis. Cohesin rings shape chromatin into loops as well. This
serves the functional separation of chromatin subunits. Most
importantly, however, they connect sister chromatids (cohesion). They
prevent the precocious* separation (and, thereby, possible
missegregation) of chromatids. During anaphase, cohesion rings are opened.
12
Cohesion must be completely resolved only when
kinetochores are oriented towards opposite poles
(stepwise resolution of cohesion along chromosome
arms). Cohesin is replaced by condensin, the
chromosomes shorten. Spin fibres pull chromatids
to opposite poles (not learn the names).
The mitotic cell cycle
Meristematic* cells pass through a sequence of
growth during interphase (G1, S, G2) and division in
mitosis (cell cycle). During interphase DNA is
replicated and transcription and protein synthesis
take place. The cell cycle is meticulously
regulated, and the processes of each stage must
be completed before the next stage begins. Cells
that stop dividing (e.g., in some tissues of adult
multicellular organisms) persist in the G0 stage of
interphase. At some points (checkpoints) of the
cell cycle, the internal and external conditions for
continuing the cell cycle are evaluated. At the G1/S
checkpoint (aka restriction point) the cell decides
whether it will enter another round. The cell cycle can be (transiently) halted at additional
checkpoints.
Cyclins control the cell cycle. Cyclical changes in the concentration of regulator proteins, the cyclins,
serve as a pacemaker for the cell cycle. Cyclins are proteins whose concentration changes
periodically during the cell cycle. D- and E- cyclins control cell growth at the beginning of a cycle.
Cyclin-A controls DNA replication in S-phase.
B-cyclins trigger mitotic processes such as:
disintegration of the nuclear membrane,
formation of the spindle and chromosome
packaging.
Protein kinases (enzymes that transfer energy rich phosphate residue to a substrate molecule) whose
activity is dependant on cyclins (cycklin dependant kinases – CDKs) and phosphatases activate or
inactivate proteins which have functions at certain
stages of the cell cycle. One of the numerous cyclinCDK complexes is MPF, the mitosis (or maturation)
promoting factor (main switch for entering mitosis).
The periodical formation of the cyclin-CDK
complexes using the example of MPF is shown in
the right image.
DNA damage checkpoints
DNA damage checkpoints monitor DNA damage or
incomplete DNA replication and (transiently*) arrest the
cell cycle to buy time for the cell to make appropriate
measures (e.g., repair or apoptosis). This can be also
called “Rettungskette” (due to the professor
not finding a good English word).
13
The spindle checkpoint
The spindle checkpoint is also called the spindle assembly checkpoint
(SAC). During mitosis chromosomes initially attack randomly to
microtubules. At the spindle checkpoint division is delayed until all
chromosomes are correctly attached to the spindle. Otherwise,
chromosomes could become distributed incorrectly.
A kinase between sister chromatids phosphorylates and inactivates
components of the kinetochores. Microtubules cannot stably*
attach to the inactive kinetochore. Incorrect orientated (monopolar)
microtubules that pull sister chromatids in the same direction detach
after a while (A). Microtubules attach and detach repeatedly, and
the play continues until microtubules from opposite poles (bipolar
microtubules) happen to attach (B). This
generates tension on the centromeres (C),
and kinetochores are pulled away from the
kinase. Thereupon the kinase can no longer
destabilize the attachment of microtubules.
This prevents destabilization of correctly
orientated microtubules and anaphase can
begin. At the same time, kinetochore dephosphorylation is the signal for the release of sister
chromatid cohesion (B-C).
Meiosis
Meiosis is an indispensable part of the sexual reproduction cycle.
Meiosis reverses the doubling of the chromosome set at fertilization. The
sexual reproduction cycle is also called the ploidy cycle. In evolutionary
advanced organisms, the diploid phase of
the life cycle is prevalent (diploidy is an
advantage → rescue copy). In haplonts
(many protists and algae) mitosis occurs only
in the haploid generation. In haplo-diplonts
(plants) both the haploid and diploid
generation and in diplonts (animals) only in
the diploid generation.
The functions of meiosis are reduction, recombination, and regeneration (only a theoretical
consideration). During reduction the diploid chromosome set of somatic cells is reduced to the
haploid chromosome set of gamete cells. Recombination of the parental genomes and generation
leads to a genetic variety in offspring by the random distribution of parental chromosomes to
gametes and by the exchange of parts of parental chromosomes (crossing over). Regeneration is the
rejuvenation of cells and genomes by increased repair activity and elimination of mutational load due
to selection of intact genomes in haploid gametes.
Meiotic defects
Meiotic defects cause miscarriages, stillbirth* and congenital* diseases in humans. Around ¼ of all
clinically detected pregnancies are miscarriages. Chromosomal anomalies following defective meiosis
are the cause of 2/3 of miscarriages. The proportion of chromosomal anomalies has increased over
the last decades as a consequence of increasing maternal age.
14
Mitosis and meiosis compared
The stages of meiosis
Prophase is divided into substages. These are:
• Leptonema: chromatids begin to shorten and become visible as thin
threads
• Zygonema: homologous chromosomes recognize each other and pair
starting from their ends. The synaptonemal complex forms between
homologous chromosomes. Crossing over is initiated at some sites
• Pachynema: pairing extends over the entire length of chromosomes.
All chromosomes have completed crossing over
• Diplonema: the synaptonemal complex is degraded. Homologous
chromosomes begin to disjoin and remain connected at crossover
sites. These sites are called chiasma (pl: chiasmata/chiasmas). Pairs
15
of chromosomes are called bivalents. Now the microscope shows that each chromosome
consists of 2 chromatids (4 chromatids per bivalent)
• Diakinesis: the nuclear membrane is degraded, and the spindle
apparatus is formed. Chromosomes are maximally shortened.
The 2 divisions resemble the steps of mitosis.
First division
During metaphase I pared chromosomes assemble in the equatorial plane. In
anaphase I chromosome pairs separate and recombined chromosomes migrate to
the poles of the cell. During telophase I/interkinesis the chromosomes have arrived
at the poles. New nuclear membranes are formed (some species form cell walls
between daughter nuclei at this point) chromosomes uncoil transiently. Replication
does not take place because chromosomes consist of 2 chromosomes already.
Nuclei are now haploid.
Second division
During metaphase II the chromosomes shorten again. They consist of 2 chromatids
which are connected at the centromeres. The nuclear membrane is degraded. The
spindle becomes reorganized. Chromosomes occupy the metaphase plate at the cell
equator. In anaphase II sister chromatids migrate to opposite poles. During
telophase II chromatids have arrived at the poles. Nuclear membranes are formed
and chromosomes uncoil.
Pairing
Pairing of homologous chromosomes is
essential for their segregation of daughter
nuclei. Pairing consists of multiple steps.
These are:
1. Chromosome ends move to the
nuclear periphery. Homologous chromosomes become loosely associated
2. Recognition and association of homologous DNA sequences takes place at several sites of the
genome
3. A protein complex, the synaptonemal complex, is formed and stabilizes chromosome pairing
The detailed mechanisms by which homologous chromosomes recognize each other for pairing are
not yet fully understood.
Homology search
A complex of transmembrane proteins link chromosome ends to motor proteins in the cytoplasm.
This allows movements of chromosomes inside the nucleus that are needed for homologous partner
searching. In the course of this movement in zygonema, chromosomes form the bouquetarrangement. In the bouquet all chromosome ends (telomers) assemble within a small area at the
nuclear envelope. This probably facilitates partner recognition.
The synaptonemal complex
Synaptonemal complexes (SCs) are ladder-like protein structures
that connect homologous chromosomes during meiotic prophase.
The 2 chromatids of each chromosome are held together by
cohesins and at the same time attached to a lateral element.
Lateral elements, and with them, the homologous chromosomes,
are linked by transversal filaments. At some sites, a DNA-strand
runs across the SC, to exchange strands with a homologous DNA
16
molecule (crossing over). Recombination proteins involved in this process form the recombination
nodule.
The modes of meiotic recombination
Crossing over
Meiotic crossing over begins with programmed DNA double-stranded
breaks (DSBs). Separation of DNA from whole chromosomes by gelelectrophoresis. Chromosomal DNA migrates in an electrical field
according to its size (small chromosomes migrate faster and farther). DNA
of meiotic cells runs as transient “smears” due to the formation of
variable-size DNA fragments.
Despite the threat to genome integrity, DNA double-stranded breaks
are deliberately included in meiosis. The protein Spo11 cuts in a trans
esterase reaction the phosphodiester backbone of DNA. Thereby
Spo11 becomes covalently bound to the 5’ end of a DNA strand
via a tyrosine side chain and an ester bond. This process occurs
in both DNA strands.
DSBs may be repaired in different ways, however, in meiosis,
only the healing via the homologous chromosome as repair
template is desired. On the next page are
different meiotic recombination-pathways.
17
The image below shows the chiasma transition between pachynema and diplonema/diakinesis.
Chiasmata
Chiasmata (or chiasmas, sing: chiasma) are the cytologically visible consequence of crossovers in
diplonema and diakinesis. They mark the sites of crossovers. After degradation of the synaptonemal
complex, they take over the connection of homologous chromosomes with the help of cohesins. Only
2 of the 4 chromatids of a bivalent participate in a crossover. A bivalent has at least one crossover,
sometimes more. These are randomly
assigned to chromatids.
Crossover frequencies between marker genes can be expressed as genetic linkage maps. The
frequency of crossover events between 2 genetic loci is an indirect measure of their distance within a
chromosome.
An uneven distribution of
crossovers/chiasmata on and between
chromosomes by (image on the right):
18
Meiotic segregation
At least one chiasma is required for the
cohesion of homologous chromosomes
and their faithful distribution. Resolution
of cohesion in 2 steps coordinates the 1st
and 2nd meiotic division.
Spermatogenesis and oogenesis
The development of male gametes
(spermatogenesis) and female gametes
(oogenesis) proceeds differently aiming
at the production of small mobile
spermatozoa and large nutrient-rich
oocytes. Also plants possess gametes of different appearance and function (anisogamy).
Spermatogenesis
An undifferentiated germ cell, the spermatogonium, enlarges and becomes the primary
spermatocyte. It undergoes meiosis I and forms haploid secondary spermatocytes. These perform
meiosis II and produce 4 haploid spermatids. These differentiate during spermiogenesis into
spermatozoa.
Oogenesis
An undifferentiated germ cell, the oogonium, enlarges and becomes the primary oocyte. Meiosis I
produce 2 haploid cells of different sizes, the secondary oocyte and the first polar body. The polar
body (may or may not perform meiosis II) is subsequently degraded. The secondary oocyte performs
meiosis II and produces the large ootide and the secondary polar body. The ootide maturates into
the ovum. Anaphase II ensues* only after contact with a spermatozoon.
Spermatogenesis and oogenesis in mammals/humans
19
Genetics 3
The central dogma
The many functions of DNA
The DNA fulfils the requirements for a carrier of genetic information. It can save information,
multiply and pass on (replication) and make that information available. The structure of DNA is key to
understanding all of these functions. A human sperm nucleus carries the information equivalent of
almost 40mb in a volume of approximately 30µm3
. That is 3mil times the storage density of an SD
card.
DNA is composed of nucleotides
A nucleoside is a sugar and a base, e.g., Deoxyadenosine. A nucleotide
is a sugar, a base, and a phosphate group, e.g., Deoxyadenosine 5’ –
monophosphate.
The DNA is composed of 4 types of nucleotides, the bases. The
purines are adenine and guanine, and the pyrimidines are thymine,
cytosine and replacing the thymine in the RNA the uracil.
The bases covalently attach through phosphodiester bonds. By
splitting of a pyrophosphate, a
triphosphate is attached to the 3’
carbon of a resulting nucleic acid
chain, and a phosphodiester bond
connects the 5’ and the 3’ C-atoms
of consecutive pentoses. For the
DNA dATP is used and phosphate
groups provide energy for making
the string longer → long chain.
Across different species there are different amounts of bases. But there is 1 constant. It is that the
number of As is equal to the number of Ts. The same goes for the number of Cs and Gs.
DNA double helix
The structure of the double helix was “discovered” by Francis Crick (X-ray crystallographer) and
James Watson (Biologist) with the work from Rosalind Franklin (X-ray crystallographer). X-ray
diffraction* patterns gave information of the dimensions of DNA. They answered the questions about
the amount of the strands of the helix, the running direction of those strands, their location on the
20
inside or the outside and how the 4 chemical bases were arranged. The image on the
right shows “Photo 51”, done by Rosalind Franklins and her graduate student Raymond
Gosling. Such a photo is made by crystalizing a lot of DNA and then making an image. A
pattern repeats every 3.4nm which suggests a
helical structure.
The nucleotide chains of the DNA are polar.
DNA and RNA sequences are always written in
the 5’-3’ direction. This is the direction in
which they are extended. In DNA double
strands, the 2 strands run in opposite
directions. Hydrogen bonds between the
bases connect the 2 strands.
There are 2 types of DNA base pairs. The first
one is the adenine-thymine base pair (2
hydrogen bonds) and the second one is the
guanine-cytosine base pair (3
hydrogen bonds). Always a
purine (A, G) and a pyrimidine
(C, T, U) are paired. These
pairs make the fixed width of
the crystal structure. A DNA
with more G-C bonds is a
tighter DNA.
DNA replication
“It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately
suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material.” (Crick, Watson,
Nature, 1953).
The DNA sequence is duplicated through base pairing. It is done semi-conservative.
Steps of DNA replication
DNA replication consists of 5 steps. These are:
1. Origin licensing (origin of replication only once per cell cycle)
2. Origin firing
3. DNA unwinding
4. RNA priming
5. DNA polymerization
DNA replication in bacteria
The replication begins at the origin of replication (oriC). There the double
helix begins to wind into its individual strands. Replication is bidirectional,
hence 2 replication forks flank* the origin. A replication bubble develops. In
bacteria, 1 origin (oriC) is sufficient to replicate the entire circular genome
(approximately 4.6mil base pairs in E. coli). The DNA synthesis rate is around
900 bases/s. The entire process (replication + cell division) takes about
20min for E. coli.
Eukaryotic chromosomes
Eukaryotic chromosomes have many origins
of replication. To speed things up, eukaryotes
have multiple origins of replication.
21
Origin licensing and firing
To ensure that every region of DNA is replicated a single time, each origin must
fire a single time in each cell cycle. To accomplish this, each origin is prepared or
“licensed” to fire only in the G1 stage by recruitment of the Origin Recognition
Complex (ORC). Then, in S phase, the origin “fires” to unwind the DNA and initiate
replication.
Helicases
The MCM helicase unwinds the DNA to give the polymerase access to single
stranded DNA (ssDNA).
RNA priming
DNA polymerases cannot start DNA synthesis de novo,
they need an OH end to add a nucleotide. Therefore, a
short piece of RNA (~10 nucleotides) must first bind to
the template DNA as a primer. This RNA is synthesized by
an RNA polymerase, primase. These RNA primers are then removed and replaced with DNA. This
must be done because the RNA primase makes a lot of mistakes (?).
Polymerases
A template sequence, and RNA primer sequence complementary to the template,
deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dATP, dTTP, dCTP, dGTP) and DNA polymerases are required for
DNA synthesis. When a nucleotide is added, the 2
terminal phosphates are cleaved off and the new
link in the chain again offers a 3’-OH group to
which the next nucleotide can be attached.
Discontinuous replication
Since the synthesis only runs in the 5’-3’ direction, it can only take
place continuously on 1 strand. When the replication bubble or
replication fork grows, further primers must constantly bind to the
lagging strand (discontinuous synthesis), whereas synthesis
proceeds from the same primer on the leading strand (continuous
replication).
Topoisomerases
Topoisomerases relieve tension created
during replication. The separation of the
strands by the helicase causes increasing
screwing* (supercoiling) in the subsequent
region. The resulting tensions hinders further
separation and must therefore be resolved.
Bringing it all together
All together is shown on the image on the right.
Telomeres
DNA synthesis at the end of the chromosome is a
problem because when the RNA primer is gone, there
is no free 3’ hydroxyl group to which a nucleotide
22
could be attached. As a result, newly synthesized DNA strands shorten by
about 10-100 nucleotides in each round of replication.
The telomeres at the ends of the chromosomes are repetitive DNA
sequences. A ribonucleoprotein (telomerase ( a reverse transcriptase))
extends the 3’ ends of DNA at the ends of chromosomes. Telomerase RNA
serves as a template for the syntesis of the
complementary telomere DNA sequence (this is an
example of reverse transcription – an exception of the
“Central Dogma” of genetic information flow). This
creates single-stranded 3’ overgangs, to which RNA
primers bind again in the next S-phase and can fill the
gap.
Replication factories in the nucleus
The DNA polymerase machinery forms foci within the
nucelus during DNA replication where many active
polymerases are all conducting DNA replications in the
same area. The purpose of the polymerases coming
together into these factories is still largely unclear.
DNA vs RNA
Transcription
Transcription is performed by RNA polymerase
RNA polymerases are recruited to promoter regions of genes, where they initiate transcription. There
are 3 phases of transcription. They are:
1. Initiation: Transcription starts at the transcription start site.
The DNA double helix is unwound to expose the template
strand for RNA polymerase.
2. Elongation: The polymerase traverses* the length of the
gene, synthesizing RNA until it encounters a termination
sequence.
3. Termination: After the polymerase encounters a
termination sequence, it falls of the DNA.
23
Transcriptional promoters
A promoter is a region of DNA that is recognized
by the transcription machinery ant to which
proteins bind to activate transcription. In
general, everything is regulated by promoters.
Initiation factors bind to promoters
In eukaryotes, the pre-initiation complex (PIC) binds to promoter regions and recruit
RNA polymerases. The PIC recruited by transcription factors that regulate gene
expression.
The many functions of RNA
Post-transcriptional modifications of mRNAs
The immediate product of transcription is the premRNA. This must be processed into mature mRNA by:
• 5’-capping
• 3’-polyadenylation
• Splicing (depending on species)
• mRNA editing (sometimes)
Capping and polyadenylation
3’-polyadenylation is adding adenines at the end
(make a Poly-A-tail) for stability.
24
Splicing
Parts of the open reading frame of
most genes are non-coding
(introns). They are transcribed and
then excised* from the pre-mRNA.
The remaining coding parts are
called exons. Not all eukaryotes
have introns, e.g., a type of yeast.
Introns start with GU and end with AG. A
spliceosome finds the introns and detaches it
and instead of reattaching it, it attaches it to
itself → the 2 exons are attached.
Why have introns?
There are several theories why introns exist.
Some of them are:
• Alternative splicing – multiple different proteins can be made from the same pre-mRNA with
different combinations of introns
• Shuffling of exons between different genes during evolution to create new proteins
• Increase expression levels of genes with introns (or decrease expression of viral genes
without introns)
• Selfish DNA elements (put themselves into genes → had to be removed)?
Translation
Translation is the process of using the information from an mRNA to create a protein. Components
which are needed for translation are mRNA, ribosomes and tRNA amino acid complexes.
The genetic code
All living things have a triplet genetic code, such that
every 3 bases code for 1 amino acid. Each 3 base
combination is called a codon. There are more codons
(64) than amino acids, so some amino acids can be made
by more than 1 codon. Genes almost always start with an
AUG, which codes for methionine (the sequence before
the start codon is the 5’ UTR). There are 3 different stop
codons, which signal the end of translation of the mRNA
(the sequence after this point is the 3’ UTR).
Ribosomes
In eukaryotes, the small ribosome subunit first binds to the 5’ methylguanosine cap and scans the
mRNA until it encounters a matching AUG. The first amino acid of the resulting chain is methionine
(coded by ATG/AUG). In most proteins, it is
removed after translation. The tRNA that
matches the second codon comes next.
The first elongation step begins with the
peptide bond between the first and the
second amino acid.
25
Start and stop codons
To determine which AUG to use as the start codon,
ribosomes look for a consensus* sequence among surrounding
bases calles the Kozak sequence (only in eukaryotes). Stop
codons only terminate translation if they are in frame.
tRNAs
tRNAs bring the amino acids (aa) to the ribosomes for the synthesis of
proteins. Aminoacyl tRNA synthases recharge tRNAs by using ATP to add an
amino acid to the acceptor end.
Peptide bond formation
During translation, protein chains are formed by dehydrating the bond
between the carboxyl group of 1 amino acid and the amino group of the next
amino acid (peptide bond). The side chains (R) protrude from the peptide
backbone. The direction of elongation of the polypeptide is from the Nterminus to the C-terminus. The sequence
of the amino acids determines the primary
structure of the protein.
Protein folding
In addition to the sequence of amino acids in
the protein (primary structure), proteins fold
into more complex structures that allow
them to perform complex functions.
26
Genetics 4
Mutation
Mutations are a fundamental property of living systems. They create novel alleles and thus are
indispensable for the genetic variation in populations and evolution. At the level of individuals,
mutations are most often negative. They are the cause of genetic alterations that can lead to cell
death, heritable diseases, and cancer.
A mutation is an alteration of a DNA sequence. Mutations can appear in coding or noncoding regions
of a genome. Mutations may, but do not necessarily, cause visible changes of the phenotype.
Mutations can be heritable if they occur of the germline, or non-heritable if they affect somatic cells.
In humans, autosomal mutations affect genes on autosomes (non-sex chromosomes), X-linked
mutations affect genes on the X chromosome. Y-linked mutations are extremely rare and mainly
cause infertility.
Classification of mutations by different criteria
Dominant and recessive mutations
A dominant mutation affects the phenotype, even when present only heterozygous, i.e., in 1 of the 2
copies of the genome of a diploid organism. A recessive mutation in a diploid cell does not normally
affect the phenotype if it is heterozygous. It may go unnoticed for many generations until an
offspring individual inherits the mutated allele from both its parents. This individual is homozygous
for the mutation and displays the mutant phenotype. Dominant means that if 1 copy is mutated, one
can see the difference.
Size of affected region and their most common causes
Substitutions, deletions, and insertions are gene mutations. Substitution is the replacement of a DNA
base by another one (point mutation). Causes are mutagenic substances and replication errors. At
deletion or insertion, 1 or more base pairs are removed or added. Causes are mutagenetic
substances and replication errors. Chromosome mutations are changes in the chromosome
structure. Causes are a defective recombination or repair of DNA breaks. Genome mutations are
changes in the chromosome number. Causes are mis-segregation in mitosis or meiosis.
Phenotypical effects
Loss-of-function mutations (null-mutations) replace or completely prevent the function of a gene
product. Lethal mutations disturb an essential process and are incompatible with life → organism will
die. Gain-of-function-mutations create a gene product with a novel or enhanced function (important
for evolution). Neutral mutations do not influence the phenotype because they may affect a
noncoding portion of the genome or a redundant gene. Most mutations fall into this category.
Conditional mutations display a phenotype dependent on external (environmental) conditions, e.g.,
temperature sensitive alleles. These are functional only within a certain (normally lower)
temperature range. Siam-cats possess a temperature-sensitive allele of the tyrosine kinase gene with
an early function in pigment formation. The protein functions only in cool body parts. The other parts
display an albino phenotype.
Spontaneous emergence of a metabolic mutant in haploid baker’s yeast
Mutated cells with an enzymatic defect are unable to synthetize the base adenine and accumulate a
coloured precursor thereof*. Therefore, red cell colonies are formed. However, adenine must be
present in the growth medium for these cells to be viable. This mutation produces a phenotype in
haploid cells. In diploid cells, the presence of an intact allele would rescue the wild-type appearance
→ such a mutation is recessive. Mutations are mostly only detected in haploid cells because in
diploid ones is a rescue copy.
27
Do mutations occur at random or due to selective pressure? – The Luria-Delbrück
Fluctuation test
During cultivation, prior to the contact with pages, a few cells experience random mutations that
make them resistant to phages. They pass on this resistance to progeny cells. Therefore, sometimes
there can be many resistant cells on a plate. The sooner the mutation occurred in culture, the more
resistant offspring will arise and form visible colonies on the plate. The fluctuation test shows that
mutations occur random.
The incidence of mutations varies strongly between organisms and genetic loci within an
organism
The table shows examples of the incidence
of mutants (a mutation is an event, and a
mutant is the carrier of this mutation). These
are due to spontaneous phenotypically
manifested mutations. Some DNA sequences, e.g., repeats, are more susceptible to mutations, and in
genes that are encoded by long sequences, mutations are more frequent because they are a large
target for random changes.
Incidence of gene mutations in baker´s yeast
A certain base pair changes in 1 out of 3-5*1010 (30-60 billion) progeny.
28
Incidence of gene mutations in humans
Each person receives ~55 mutations from their father and ~14
from their mother. Older fathers pass on more mutations than
younger fathers. This is because sperm cells are being
produces continuously and so more mistakes can be made –
sperm cells come from a higher number of divisions. For
mothers, there is only a small age dependent effect on the
inheritance of point mutations. However, more striking agedependent problems exist in mothers. Most harmful mutations are eliminated right away. A human
genome has around 150-180 nonsense mutations (no problem because of the 2nd copy).
Review
Due to the redundency of the genetic code, the
substitution of individual bases does not
necessarily cause a higher change in the amino
acid sequence of a protein.
There are different consequences of base
substitutions on a gene product.
Triggers of gene mutations
Endogenous causes
These are inevitable because replication by itself is an error-prone process and DNA, as a complex
molecule, is subject to ageing and decay. Replication errors are due to:
• Mistakes made by polymerases (around 99% of mistakes made by polymerases are corrected
by proofreading and mismatch repair)
• Spontaneous conformational changes of bases (tautomerisms; corrected by mismatch repair)
• Spontaneous desamination and depurination of bases by hydrolysis
• Replication slippage at base pairs
Errors in the repair of exogenously triggered DNA damage. Transposon-insertion is when mobile DNA
sequences can insert into a gene and change its sequence. About 1:10.000 DNA replications is wrong
(repaired by proofreading activity). Afterwards 1:1.000.000.000 is still wrong.
Exogenous causes (natural and human made (external))
There are chemical mutagens and high-energy radiation. Chemical mutagens are alkylating or
oxidative substances, base analogs or intercalating substances. Under high-energy radiation fall
gamma rays, X-rays, and UV-radiation. They can be terrestrial or cosmic and act in 2 ways. The 1st is
directly by induction of breaks in DNA and the
2
nd is indirectly by the formation of cellular
oxygen radicals. Despite Chernobyl and
Fukushima these are hardly important. A 10h
flight makes on double strand break in 1:500
cells which is less than the frequency of a
normal mutation.
29
Replication errors due to tautomerization
Tautomeres are isomeric (same totals formula, different structural
formula) molecules that can easily transit into one another due to the
translocation of single atoms or residues*. They exist in certain ratios.
For guanine, the keto-form predominates, but molecules switch
temporarily to the enol-form all the time. Tautomeric forms do exist
in all bases.
The image below shows the replacement of guanine by adenine after
2 replication cycles via the enol-form of guanine. After the replication
1 cell will be wrong due to the spontanious tautomerisation (most
mismatches are recognized during relication and corrected my
mismatch repair. The few remaining ones cause base substitutions).
Hydraulic fission*
Shift of the reading frame (frameshift) due to an error during replication (replication slippage)
30
Dimerization of consecutive bases
If consecutive bases dimerize, the hydrogen bonds
with the complementary (opposite) bases are lost.
This causes a frameshift during replication. This is
a frequent mutagenic effect of UV-radiation.
Cyclobutene rings (A) or 6-4-photoreactin products
(B) are formed between consecutive bases, in
particular thymines and rarely cytosines.
Base alteration due to exogenous factors
These are done by oxidation by free radicals upon ionizing radiation or
chemicals. Oxidated guanine (oxoguanine) can pair with cytosine or
adenine. In the latter case this leads to the incorporation of thymine
after 2 rounds of replication. This C:G → T:A transversion is one of the
most frequent mutations found in human tumours. Alkylation
(methylation or ethylation) is caused by e.g., nitrosamine of
methylmethansulfonate (MMS, an experimental mutagen).
Ethylguanine pairs with thymine and ethylthymine pairs with guanine.
Intercalating substances
The incorporation (intercalation*) of planar molecules between neighbouring base pairs leads to
structural changes of the double helix. This can cause a frameshift with gain or loss of 1 or several
bases during replication. Ethidium bromide, proflavine, acridine orange are intercalating substances
used in molecular biology.
The Ames-Test for mutagenic substances
When bacteria carrying a mutation are exposed to a mutagen,
another mutation may recover a function that was lost
because of the 1st mutation (here it is the ability to grow in the
absence of histidine = Histidine-Prototrophy): revertants* are
created. The Ames-Test determines the mutagenicity of a
substance by way of the formation of revertants.
Substances may have different effects on bacteria and
humans. In particular, substances can be decomposed or,
conversely, turned into mutagens via metabolism in the liver.
Therefore, liver extract, whose enzymes simulate liver
functions, is added to the bacterial culture.
Mutations caused by transposons
Transposable elements (transposons) are chunks of DNA that can change their genomic position
within and between chromosomes (transposition). They were first described as "Jumping Genes" in
maize by Barbara McClintock.
Transposons have been found in all organisms.
Transposons are mutagenic. Insertion into the coding region of a gene may disrupt the gene and
prevent its normal expression. Insertion into a promoter may after the strength of expression of a
gene. Insertion into introns may influence gene splicing or cause precocious termination of
transcription.
Nearly half of the human genome consists of transposons (as opposed to only ca. 1-2% coding
sequences). However, most of the transposons in humans are probably inactive.
Due to their ability to alter genes and chromosomes, transposons play an important role in evolution.
31
There are retrotransposons (class I), which use RNA as the
mobile intermediate, and DNA transposons (class II).
Retrotransposons are related to RNA viruses. They perform
reverse transcription, in order to produce DNA from an RNA
template. This leads to an increase of transposon copies in
the genome. In contrast, DNA transposons leave the original
position.
Transposons are DNA stretches that can change their
position within the genome (transposition). It is likely
that they originated from viruses. They are a class of
selfish DNA.
DNA repair and recombination
Some DNA repair systems
Faulty DNA repair mechanisms cause proneness* to
various types of cancer and are the cause of a
number of hereditary diseases, e.g., Fanconi's
anaemia, Ataxia telangiectasia, Xeroderma
pigmentosum, in humans. After proofreading
1:1.000.000.000 is wrong and after mismatch
repair only 1:50.000.000.000 is wrong. These will
be inherited.
Mismatch repair of incorrectly incorporated
nucleotides
99% of incorrectly incorporated nucleotides are
corrected by proofreading by the polymerase
during replication. Most of the remaining
mistakes are repaired subsequently. The
problem is which of the non-matching nucleotides is the wrong one? Often,
the mismatch repair system recognizes the old (correct) strand via its
methylated bases. The new non-methylated strand is cut at such methylation
sites and a section encompassing* the faulty pairing is removed.
Subsequently, the gap is filled by DNA polymerase III dependent synthesis.
Photo-reactivation-repair of pyrimidine-dymers
This is found in many bacteria, plants and animals, but not in humans. 2
consecutive thymines are forming a dimer. Photoreactivation enzyme (PRE)
associates with the thymine-dimer. It requires a photon to disconnect the
dimer. Hydrogen bonds with complementary bases in the old strand are reestablished.
Base excision repair
It is found in bacteria and eukaryotes. It repairs DNA with a faulty base.
DNA glycosylases recognize faulty bases and cut them off. Next, the
base-less sugar is recognized and resected* by endonucleases. The
resulting gap is filled up with the complementary nucleotide by DNA
polymerase and ligase.
32
Nucleotide excision repair
It is found in bacteria and, in a more complicated form, in eukaryotes. It repairs
defects that affect more than 1 consecutive nucleotide after the shape of the double
helix. Around 10-30 nucleotides around the defective site are resected. Similar to
mismatch repair, the resulting gap is filled up with the help of DNA polymerase I and
the ends are connected by ligase.
SOS-response and translesion-synthesis
This is when the worst comes to the worst. If the repair of extensive defects
is not possible, bacteria try to replicate DNA across the defected region (the
lesion). To this end, DNA polymerase III is replaced by other polymerases
(SOS-response). These polymerases do not require complementary bases for
DNA synthesis and mostly incorporate nucleotides arbitrarily. This causes a
mutation in the new DNA of a daughter cell, but it may be better than
producing no progeny cell at all.
Repair of double strandes breaks
Double stranded breaks (DSBs) are the most dangerous type of DNA damage.
Their frequency (in mammals) is estimated at 10 per day per dividing cell.
There are 2 ways of repairing DSBs. The 1st one is homology independent repair and the 2nd one is
homology dependent repair (recombinational repair). At the 1st one, DSBs may be repaired by simple
but error-prone mechanisms. These are non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and single strand
annealing (SSA). NHEJ and SSA mostly take place in G1 stage of the cell cycle when there is no intact
DNA molecule available as a repair template. At the 2nd one, DSB repair via homologous
recombination (recombinational repair) is more elaborate but less at risk of producing mistakes. The
sister chromatid or a homologous chromosome can serve as a repair template. This repair may result
in the directional (non-reciprocal) or mutual (reciprocal) exchange of sequences. The non-reciprocal
ones are synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA) and break-induced replication (BIR) and the
reciprocal ones are sister chromatid exchange (SCE) and crossing over (CO).
33
Repair of programmed DSBs
Recombination processes were probably developed as early as in prokaryotes for error free repair of
DNA lesions (?). Moreover, organisms can deliberately create DSBs and utilize these self-inflicted
programmed DSBs and their repair for different purposes. These are:
• Somatic recombination for creating the huge diversity of vertebrate antibodies (V-D-J
recombination)
• Somatic recombination for creating antigenic variability of parasites
• Somatic recombination for mating type switching in yeasts
• Insertion of transposons and viruses into host DNA
• Meiotic recombination in eukaryotes
Gene technology makes use of the natural propensity to recombine for
the production of recombinant DNA. The recombinational exchange of
DNA pieces can be mutual (reciprocal) or
directed (non-reciprocal).
NHEJ repair of self-inflicted DSBs in the
somatic recombination of immunoglobulin
genes B- and T-lymphocytes
Alternative splicing of mRNA, (rare) gene
overlaps and somatic V-D-J recombination
allow organisms to produce more different
protein sequences than there are genes.
Review of mitosis
There is the repair of deliberately induced
(programmed) DSBs in meiotic
recombination. Homologous and not sister
chromosomes are used.
Differential straining of sister chromatids
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) can be
incorporated in DNA instead of thymidine.
After 1 round of replication, a chromosome
consists of 2 chromatids with 1 Thd- and
BrdU-strand each. After another round of
replication in the presence of BrdU, a
chromosome consists of a BrdU-BrdUchromatid and a Thd-BrdU-chromatid. A
special staining method reveals the
difference.
Cytological detection of reciprocal DNA
exchanges in mitosis and meiosis
Different staining of sister chromatids allows the
visualization of sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) in
mitosis and the exchange of homologous chromatids
(crossover) in meiosis.
34
Genetics 5
Mendelian Genetics
Mendel introduced experimental methods and
quantitative analysis to research on inheritance.
From his crossings of peas, he derived principles of
inheritance, known today as Mendel´s laws.
Quantitative traits are more often, e.g., skin colour.
The image below shows the result of Mendel´s
crossing of purple and white blooming garden peas.
35
F1 is heterozygous
36
The F1 is heterozygous for both alleles for colour and
shape (GELB/gelb and RUND/rund) and it can produce 4
different types of egg- or sperm-cells. These are:
GELB/RUND, GELB/rund, gelb/RUND and gelb/rund. The
frequencies of genotypes and phenotypes of the F2
follow unique ratios.
The 9:3:3:1 ratio of phenotypes following a 2-factor crossing has become an icon of Mendelian
Genetics and is found in many contexts, such as in logos of research institurions.
37
The 3rd Mendelian law is valid for multifactoral crossings. However there are also some exceptions.
Calculation of genotypes in F2 in multifactorial crosses
In crosses with many genes, the Punnet
square becomes impractical. In such
cases it is preferable to calculate the
probability of genotypes.
When independent events occur
simultaneously, the probability of the
outcomes occuring in combination is
equal to the product of their
individual probabilities of occurrence
→ product of law probability.
Summary of Mendel´s laws
1. Law of uniformity: The F1 (1st daughter generation) is uniform. (Law of reciprocity: The other
laws are valid irrespective of the parental origin of the dominant expression of a trait, i.e.,
whether father or mother is the carrier of the dominant allele)
2. Law of splitting: Crossing the uniform F1 results in splitting into different phenotypes in F2 in
unique ratios
3. Law of independence: In principle, traits are inherited independent of each other. They may
appear in novel combinations in progeny
Alternative summary of Mendel´s postulates
1. Unit factors in pairs: Genetic characters are controlled by unit factors existing in pairs in
individual organisms
2. Dominance/recessiveness: When 2 unlike unique factors responsible for a single character
are present in a single individual, 1 unit factor is dominant to the other, which is said to be
recessive
3. Segregation: During the formation of gametes, the paired unit factors separate, or segregate,
randomly so that each gamete receives 1 or the other with equal likelihood
4. Independent assortment: During gamete formation, segregating pairs of unit factors assort
independently of each other
Later geneticists gave the laws the numbers and names.
38
Extensions of Mendelian genetics
Complete dominance, partial dominance, codominance
Mendel coined the terms dominant for the form of a trait that is visible in a heterozygote, and
recessive for the hidden form. Recessive insinuates* that this form recedes or completely disappears
in the heterozygous organism. However, in the F2 it appears unchanged. In the case of complete
dominance, the phenotype of a heterozygous individual completely equals the phenotype of a
homozygous dominant individual. In the case of partial dominance, the amount of gene product of
the dominant allele is not sufficient to elicit* in the heterozygous state the same phenotype as in the
homozygous state. In the case of codominance, 2 different alleles of a gene contribute equally to the
phenotype of a heterozygous individual.
Partial/incomplete dominance
None of the 2 alleles of the gene can completely mask
(dominate) the other allele, therefore the phenotype of
heterozygous individuals is the intermediate of those of the 2
homozygous parents.
Codominance
In the case of codominance, the 2 different alleles of a gene affect the
phenotype of a heterozygous equally strongly.
Codominant expression of alleles using the example of the AB0 blood group system
Determining the genotype for a characteristic with complete dominance using a testcross (backcross)
If the F2 individual is homozygous dominant, cross with
a homozygous recessive individual (backcross) will
produce 100% heterozygous offspring, which all display
the dominant phenotype. If the individual in question is
heterozygous, this cross produces 50% homozygous
recessive offspring, which display the recessive
phenotype.
39
Polygeny
Polygeny is the contribution of multiple genes to a
trait. An example is the eye colour in Drosophila.
The normal (wild type) eye colour is caused by the
products of at least a dozen genes, including the
pigments drosopherin and Xanthommatin, and
also dependent of the product of the white gene.
The brown gene makes a pink eye colour. The
absence of the white gene makes the eye white –
the genes get the name when they are not there.
Epistasis
A gene influences the phenotypical expression of another, nonhomologous gene. An example is the mouse coat colour. Gene
B encodes pigment (B – black, b – brown) in the hair follicles. B
is dominant. The product of gene C allows the pigments to
enter hairs (C – functional, c – defective). A cc mouse will have
a white coat, irrespective of the B/b genotype. Thus, the
expression of B or b is dependent on C, i.e., gene C is epistatic
over gene B.