Identify the language of the main content in the following text and create flashcards based on its content, keeping all flashcards in the same language as the main content of the text:

Genetics 12
General properties of cancer
Cancers are defined by uncontrolled cell growth and
division. Solid tumours become especially deadly
after they metastasize, gaining the ability to grow in
many different parts of the body.
Cancer is not a single disease
Different cancer types have a huge range of prognoses. Some types have
relatively straight forwarded and effective treatments whereas other types are
extremely difficult to treat. Even within cancer types, there are wide ranges of
sub-types that can greatly influence the disease progression and treatment
options. There is generally a higher survival rate with cancer in tissues that are
not necessary for survival e.g., testicular cancer.
Hallmarks* of cancer
There are certain hallmarks of cancer that are extremely
common across many cancer types. These changes are often
necessary for continued growth. Not a single mutation can do all
changes. Many mutations are acquired with time.
Cancers must prevent apoptosis and evade the immune system
In addition to continuing to divide, cancer cells must also find
ways to prevent death. When cells accumulate large amounts of
DNA damage, they ordinarily undergo programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Some of the most
common cancer mutations prevent apoptosis from occuring. In addition, the immune system targets
cells with certain types of DNA damage. Cancer cells must therefore also evade* detection by the
immune system.
Cell cycle checkpoints ordinarily prevent unregulated proliferation
Although the metazoan-specific checkpoint pathways
are more specific for preventing cancer, some of the
universal checkpoint pathways also contain many
oncogenes and tumor surpressors. Why would
unicellular eukaryotes such as yeast that cannot get
cancer still have tumor surpressors?
Cancer and cell cycle entry
Cell cycle progression is controlled by cyclins, which activate cyclin
dependent kinases (CDKs). CDKs phosphorylate many substrates
throughout the cell cycle to trigger events related to DNA
replicatoin and mitosis. Cyclins E and D are the ones that are most
relevant to cancer, as they are required for cell cycle entry, which is
often referred to as the “restriction point”.
Types of mutations in cancer
Genome instability is a hallmark of cancer
The simplest way to get many mutations is to increase the rate at which mutations
accumulate. This increase in mutation rate is called genetic instability.