Posttranscriptional regulation
Gene regulation can occur after transcription by interaction of specific molecules with specific
regions on the transcript. This can e.g., change the secondary structure of the RNA, establish covalent
modifications of RNA, or change the stability of the RNA molecule. This can increase or decrease the
efficiency of transcription. In bacteria, 2 principal manners of controlling transcription/translation by
modifying the secondary structure of RNA are known. These are attenuation (reduction of gene
expression levels) and riboswitches. Attenuation is the reduction of transcription through an
attenuator sequence. It is a feature of operons responsible for amino acid synthesis (e.g., trp
operon). A riboswitch is a conformation change in the secondary structure of the 5’ UTR or mRNA.
After transcription secondary structures form, that can be recognized by ligands. This leads to
modulation of transcription or translation. In e.g., B. subtilis 5% of genes are controlled by
riboswitches.
A reminder: In bacteria transcription and translation occur simultaneously.
Attenuation at the trp operon – an additional layer of control of the trp operon activity
Riboswitches
The ligand binding site is called “aptamer”. They
are similar to attenuation secondary structure is
changed, but regulation occurs through specific
ligand-aptamer interaction (?). Riboswitches can
be controlled by a large number of ligands, e.g.,
amino acids, vitamins, sugars, metal ions, … .
Regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes
Eukaryotic gene regulation establishes cellular heterogeneity and diversity
In multicellular organisms, most cells contain the identical genome information (DNA). Diversity is
established by specific regulations of gene expression. The rule of thumb states that in most cells
approximately half of the available genes are expressed. The combination of expressed genes and
their relative expression level define the cell identity.
Features of gene expression regulation in eukaryotes
Key differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic gene expression are:
• Much larger genome size and complexity
• DNA is combined with histones and other proteins to form chromatin
• Histones can be modified. Complex histone code influences local chromatin activity and
accessibility
• Spatial separation of transcription and
translation (genes on numerous
chromosomes are enclosed in a double
membrane nucleus)
• Processing of transcripts – splicing, capping
polyadenylation
• Transport to cytoplasm/export from nucleus
• Less use of polycistronic transcripts
• In prokaryotes transcription on-states are
the norm – regulation is achieved by specific
reduction of transcription
Multiple levels of transcriptional regulation can be used to control gene expression in eukaryotes
• Chromatin remodelling and regulatory histone modifications
• Splicing and RNA processing
• Regulation of RNA export from nucleus to cytoplasm
• mRNA stability/degradation (mRNAs have a wide range of half-lives (t1/2))
Control of translation rates
• Posttranslational modifications of proteins and differential regulation
of protein stability
Changes in the nucleosome composition alter accessibility of DNA
Nucleosomes consist of approximately 146bp of DNA wrapped around a
histone octamer composed of pairs of each of the 4 core histones (H2A, H2B,
H3 and H4). Histones normally contain histone H2A. Variant histones (e.g.,
H2A.Z) affect the nucleosome mobility and positioning on DNA. Nucleosome
position can repress or activate transcription by gating accessibility of the
promoter sequence.
Chromatin remodelling
This involves repositioning or removal of nucleosomes on DNA.
Chromatin remodelling requires energy in form of ATP. Repositioned
nucleosomes make chromosome regions accessible to transcription
regulatory proteins, transcription activators, RNA Pol II (RNAP II).
SWI/SNF is one of the best studied remodelling complexes. It loosens
the attachment between histone and DNA and causes reorganization
of internal nucleosome components.
Histone modifications
Covalent bonding of functional groups onto N-terminal trails of
histone proteins. This is most common on acetyl, methyl, and
phosphate. Acetylation decreases positive charge, which reduces
affinity of histones to (negatively charged) DNA → weaklier bond
DNA is better accessible to transcription factors and RNAP II (that
is why histones also must be negatively charged). Histone
acetylation of nucleosomes is catalysed by histone
acetyltransferase enzymes (HATs). They are associated with
increased transcription. Histone acetylation is reversed by histone
deacetylases (HDACs). Trimethylation of lysins 27 at histone H3
(H3K27me3) established by polycomb proteins is one of the best studies of epigenetic marks
associated with transcriptional silencing.
DNA methylation
DNA methylation occurs most often on the cytosine of CG doublets in DNA (“methyl CpG”). This is
also called CpG methylation. CpG methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing. The
majority (~80% of CpG di-nucleotides are methylated in mammals). Only at so called CpG islands the
methylation rate is much lower. They are often found in promoters, and they are at least ~500bp in
length. They have a CG content of over 50%. The average CG content genome-wide in humans is
42%.
Eukaryotic transcription initiation requires specific cis-acting sites
A cis-acting sequence is located on the same chromosome as the gene that it regulates. It is required
for accurate regulated transcription of gene, e.g., promoters, enhancers, silencers.
Promoters
Promoters are nucleotide sequences that serve as recognition sites for the transcription machinery.
They are located immediately adjacent to regulatory genes and are critical for transcription initiation.
A core promoter determines the accurate initiation of transcription, and they are upstream of the
genes they promote. Proximal-promoter elements modulate efficiency of basal* levels of
transcription.
Enhancers, silencers and insulators
Enhancers are located on either side of the gene, some distance from the gene (potentially 100s of
kb or maybe Mb away) or even within the gene. They regulate the transcription of regulatory
elements and are important for reaching the maximum level of transcription and for the cell type
specific gene expression. Insulators are found between an enhancer and a promoter for a nontarget
gene. They allow some enhancer-promoter interactions and block others. Silencers are cis-acting
transcription regulatory elements. They repress the level of transcription initiation.
Promoter diversity
Great diversity exists in eukaryotic promoters, in structure and
function. Focused promoters have a specific transcription initiation at
the start site and are the major type of initiation for lower eukaryotes.
Dispersed promoters direct initiation from several weak transcriptional
start sites.
Eukaryotic core promoter structure
Proximal-promoter elements
Promoters contain proximal-promoter
elements. They are located upstream of
TATA and BRE motifs and enhance levels
of basal transcription. Examples are CAAT
and GC boxes. Mutations in these
sequences have a major impact on
transcription levels.
Transcriptional regulation and cell type specificity of gene
expression are controlled by enhancers
Enhancers are short genomic elements (~100-1000bp). The 1st one
identified was a 70bp element from simian virus 40 (SV40).
Enhancers are defined by a specific chromatin profile and by binding
of mediator proteins. In the model: Looping brings enhancers and
promoters in contact. This stabilises an active transcription initiation
complex.
