1
Genetics
SS 2022
Wörter mit * stehen hinten im Vokabelverzeichnis
Inhalt
Genetics 1...........................................................................................................................................2
Genetics 2.........................................................................................................................................10
Genetics 3.........................................................................................................................................19
Genetics 4.........................................................................................................................................26
Genetics 5.........................................................................................................................................34
Genetics 6.........................................................................................................................................43
Genetics 7.........................................................................................................................................56
Genetics 8.........................................................................................................................................62
Genetics 9.........................................................................................................................................69
Genetics 10.......................................................................................................................................75
Genetics 11.......................................................................................................................................81
Genetics 12.......................................................................................................................................88
Genetics 13.......................................................................................................................................92
Genetics 14.....................................................................................................................................100
Vocabulary......................................................................................................................................107
Ich übernehme keine Garantie für die Richtigkeit dieser Zusammenfassung. Der Großteil der Bilder
stammen aus der Vorlesung. Ich besitze keine Rechte an diesen.
2
Genetics 1
Definition
Genetics from the Greek “génesis” which means origin deals with the principles and physical
foundations of heritable traits and the transmission (inheritance) of heritable dispositions (genes) to
the next generation.
Areas of Genetics
• Classical/Formal Genetics: How are characteristics (traits) inherited, what are genes made
of?
• Cytogenetics: What are the cellular/chromosomal foundations of inheritance?
• Molecular Genetics/Genomics: Which gene acts on which characteristic? How is the
expression of characteristics regulated?
• Developmental Genetics: How do genes direct the development of an organism?
• Applied Genetics: Clinical Genetics (Genetics of diseases), Genetics of plant and animal
breeding
• Population Genetics: How do genes direct the evolution of populations or species?
History of Genetics
Pre-scientific era
Even in the pre-scientific era certain regularities were noticed in the inheritance of traits. During
sexual reproduction both traits of the species and individual traits from both parents are handed
down to progeny*. Species traits reappear constantly in every generation, whereas individual traits
vary within certain limits and occur seemingly erratically* (e.g., hair colour). Some heritable traits
may skip generations and reappear only later in offspring. During clonal propagation* (e.g., via
shoots or budding), however, both species traits and individual traits remain constant over
generations.
The intra-specific variability of traits is the basis of natural selection. This
variability was also used for artificial selection of useful plants and animals by
humans in prehistoric times and early history by allowing the reproduction of
individuals with desired traits (seeds of best individuals: reproduce, rest:
cooking pot). The domestication and breeding of cattle, sheep and goats was at
around 8000 BC and cultured wheat at around 8000-6000 BC. For example, the
Assyrians performed artificial pollination of date palms (manual pollination of
the stamina).
Early questions pertaining* to the material foundation of inheritance
Hippokrates and Aristoteles explained inheritance as the mixing of body fluids. Offspring inherits
traits from 2 parents in arbitrary portions without recognizable rules due to random mixing of body
fluids. 300-1600 AC the concepts were mostly influenced by religion, e.g., the Preformation Theory
by Nicholas Hartsoeker (1694): sperm contains a preformed embryo, which then matures and
undergoes modifications in the womb.
Beginnings of Genetics
Genetics as a science began in the 17th
-19th century. William Harvey (after 1600) stated the theory of
Epigenesis (an organism develops from a fertilized egg). Schleiden and Schwann (1830) made the
cellular theory. All organisms consist of cells, which, in turn developed from cells. Proof came by
Louis Pasteur: only living cells create living cells. Rudolf Virchov put it 1855 in a nutshell “Omnis
cellula e cellula”. Gregor Mendel recognized 1865 the particulate nature of genes despite the
3
seemingly blurred distinction between most parental forms of traits. He introduced quantitative
methods and is the founder of the scientific approach to Genetics.
Mutation – The cause of trait variability
Carl von Linné observed a mutated Linaria vulgaris (toadflax*; 1749). Hugo de Vries observed a
mutant Oenothera lamarckiana (evening primrose*; 1904). He coined the term “mutation”. Thomas
Hunt Morgan searched for mutations in Drosophila (1910). A fly had white eyes instead of red ones.
Hermann Muller inducted* mutations by X-rays (1927).
The discovery of mutation and the laws of inheritance enabled the development of the present-day
Evolutionary Theory. Lyell (1830) found fossils that testified the existence of other, more primitive
creatures in ancient times. Where does this diversity come from? People believed that species are
static and were created by God. Lamarck stated that the changes in creatures and the origin of
diversity is a result of the inheritance of adaptation to the environment (e.g., giraffes must stretch
the neck). Darwin found out that species are not unchanging and that they evolve by natural
selection (1809). He wrote that in his book “On the origin of species”. That contradicted religious
believes and the spontaneous origin of novel species by mutations. The Synthetic (from synthesis)
Evolution Theory (1940ies) stated that random mutations produce novel traits that are inherited
according to Mendel´s laws. Selection of different traits causes continuous change and diversity of
creatures.
Chromosomes and DNA are the carriers of heritable factors
• Robert Brown (1828): description of the cell nucleus and chromosomes
• Oskar Hertwig (1876): observation of the process of fertilization in sea urchin eggs
• O. Hertwig and Theodor Boveri (1890): postulation of a reductional division preceding the
formation of gametes
• T. Boveri (1892): description of the reductional division (meiosis (in a roundworm*))
• T. Boveri (1889-1895): showing by the fertilization of de-nucleated sea urchin eggs that the
heritable information is contained in the nucleus
• Edmund Wilson (1896): postulation that chromosomes behave as expected of the carriers of
Mendel´s heritable traits
• Correns, von Tschermak, de Vries (1900): re-discovery of Mendel´s laws
• Walter Sutton (1903): confirmation that the thesis that heritable traits are located on
chromosomes. In cell nuclei of grasshoppers exist 2 identical sets of chromosomes →
Chromosome Theory of Inheritance
• Alfred H. Sturtevant, Thomas H. Morgan (1911): assigned genes to a particular chromosome
in Drosophila
Frederick Griffith discovered bacterial transformation (1928): genes are a substance, which can pass
from cells to other cells. He made an experiment in which non-virulent bacteria (Streptococcus
pneumoniae) transformed into
virulent forms. The transferred
factor is definitely not just a
component of the envelope of IS,
which is incorporated by IIR, but it
becomes a permanent part of the
heritable makeup of IIR because
they now become infectious IS
cells.
4
Are DNA or proteins the carriers of heritable information?
The original notion in 1935 was that DNA was a simple, uniform molecule. Contrasted by protein as a
polymer that can consist of amino acids in arbitrary sequence, hence appearing appropriate as the
carrier of complex information. An average polypeptide of 200 amino acids can have 20200 different
sequences. This is an astronomic figure, considering the estimated number of atoms in the visible
Universe being 1080 to 1083
.
Indirect hints at DNA as the hereditary substance
Firstly, mitochondria and chloroplasts are, besides the nucleus, carriers of
heritable traits. They too possess DNA. Other organelles don´t. Secondly,
gametes have half as much DNA as somatic cells. This ratio does not hold for
proteins. Thus, only DNA meets the postulation that fertilization combines 2
equal sets of hereditary material in a cell. Thirdly, UV radiation has its
strongest mutagenetic effect at a wavelength of 260nm. This is the absorption
maximum of DNA and RNA. Protein absorbs maximally at 280nm. This
mutations upon the 260nm UV are caused by changes at DNA. In the table there
is the DNA content (in pictograms) of sperm cells (haploid – n) and somatic cells
(diploid – 2n).
Oswald Avery, MacLeod and McCarty discovered that DNA is
the carrier of genes (1944). They lysed an S strain (forms
smooth colonies) of Streptococcus and enzymatically
destroyed proteins and RNA or DNA in the cell lysate. Upon
digestion by DNase (DNA degrading enzyme) the
transformation of an R strain (rough colonies) was no longer
possible → the ability of Streptococcus to form a
polysaccharide envelope (smooth colonies and pathogenicity)
is transferred to the non-pathogenic strain by DNA. The image shows a simplified depiction of the
experiment.
Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase confirmed 1953 that
DNA is the carrier of genes. Bacteriophages were
propagated* in bacteria, which were grown in media with
radioactive components of proteins and nucleic acids
respectively. This created phages, whose nucleic acids
(
32P) or proteins (35S) were labelled. Infection of bacteria
with such phages showed that only labelled DNA entered
bacteria, and labelled DNA, unlike labelled protein, was incorporated by the following generation of
phages.
Watson and Crick reported 1953 the double-helical structure of DNA based on X-ray structural
analysis by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklins.
Basics of inheritance
Due to the double structure of the DNA, each single strand carries the complete information and can
produce an identical duplicate (semi conservative replication) and during transcription, information is
read from single strands.
Chargaff´s rules of DNA base parity
First rule: A and T as well as G and C have a 1:1 ratio (A/T = 1, G/C = 1). This is to be expected because
of the A-T and G-C base pairing.
Second rule: in single strands, A and T are roughly equally frequent and G and C are roughly equally
frequent (A/T ~ 1, G/C ~ 1). This is to be expected if two strands of a DNA are equal (with respect to
encoding genes).
5
Chargaff´s rules apply to the genomes of eukaryotes and prokaryotes and
viruses with double-stranded DNA. They don´t apply to single-stranded
virus DNA and RNA and the second rule does not apply to mitochondrial
DNA and plastid RNA. The GC:AT ratio of DNA can deviate from a 1:1 ratio
and in fact, does so most often. DNA of most organisms are AT-rich.
The central dogma of the flow of genetic information
Information is transferred from DNA to RNA
and from RNA to proteins. However, there
are important exceptions (e.g., RNA viruses
and the elongation of chromosome ends,
where DNA is synthesized using RNA as a
template). This process is called reverse
transcription. Francis Crick postulated RNA as intermediate carrier of information because it is found
both in the nucleus (where information is stored) and in cytoplasm (where proteins are synthesized).
Confirmation came from the isolation of ribosomes with RNA bound to them.
From DNA to protein
There are 20 different amino acids. A trio of 4 DNA bases (triplets) encodes one amino acid. The DNA
sequence has three times as many elements as the corresponding protein sequence.
The genetic code
The genetic code has many properties. It is linear, i.e., information is contained as a sequence of
bases in mRNA. Each “word” consists of three ribonucleotides, hence triplet-code. The code is
unique, i.e., each triplet carries the information for only one amino acid. The genetic code is
redundant, i.e., a certain amino acid can be encoded by different DNA/RNA-sequence-triplets. The
code contains a start-triplet and usually 3 stop-triplets, which start and terminate translation
respectively. The code is read as a continuous string of characters without a separation between
triplets, it is comma-less. The code is universal. The same triplets encode the same amino acids in all
organisms (in rare exceptions (mitochondria, ciliates*, mycoplasma), one of the stop codons is
interpreted as an amino acid, or a different triplet serves as a stop codon. Even more uncommon is
the encoding of a different amino acid by a certain triplet).
6
Base triplets form a string of characters
without punctuation. 1 mutation can
destroy the whole protein.
Uncovering the triplet nature of the
genetic code
Theoretical consideration by Francis
Crick: 4 bases can encode the
information for only 4 amino acids.
Groups of 2 bases encode 16, groups of
3 encode 64 which is necessary for 20
amino acids. A series of experiments
were done by Crick, Barnett, Brenner
and Watts-Tobin (1961) on the
mutation of phages. Proflavine was
inserted between bases which changed their distances and caused the
insertion or loss of bases during replication. This can cause a shift of all
consecutive bases (frameshift). Phages undergoing such a mutation can no
longer infect certain bacterial strains. It was found, however, that the loss or
addition of bases by subsequent additional mutations can reverse this defect.
If the number of bases is reset to the original or increased or decreased by 3.
While this may cause the change of one or several amino acids, it restores the
correct reading frame (and the full functionality in many cases).
The big question is: Which triplet encodes which amino acid?
Unravelling the genetic code
In vitro synthesis of poly-phenylalanine by Nirenberg and
Matthaei was done in 1961. Synthesis of polyphenylalanine by the translation of an uracilhomopolymer disclosed the first triplet amino acid code.
Then mixed co-polymers were made. mRNA sequences with
certain proportions of bases in random order were
synthesized. The abundance of certain amino acids in the
resulting polypeptides led to the identification of additional
codes.
Calculation of expected frequencies of various triplets in a
mixed co-polymer 5C:1A. E.g.: 0,4% of triplets will be AAA.
Less than 1% lysine was synthesized. Therefore: AAA →
Lys. AAC, ACA, and CAA each have a probability of 2,3%.
Glutamine and asparagine each were represented by 2% in
the polypeptide. Therefore it is likely that they are encoded
by one of these triplets. 57,9% of triplets will be CCC. 6,9%
of triplets will contain 2A + 1C. 69% of amino acids of the
polypeptide were proline. Thus, proline is probably
encoded by CCC and a triplet with 2A and 1C and so on.
The triplet binding assay (discovered by Nirenberg and
Leder) is another method for the assignment of codons.
With this technique, ribosomes bind in vitro to a single codon of 3 nucleotides. This triplet behaves
like a codon in mRNA and interacts with an anti-codon-sequence in tRNA. The RNA ribosome
complex was then isolated, and the amino acid bound to it was determined.
Finally, it was possible to synthetize long RNAs with Di-, Tri-, and Tetranucleotide repeats. By in vitro
translation additional codon assignments and stop codons were determined.
7
Codon usage
Different species use codons at different frequencies. Codon usage plays an important role in gene
regulation. Rarely used codons within a gene sequence can slow down translation, whereas
frequently used codons can promote it. In the
table is the codon usage of alanine. Different
codon usage by different organisms is related
to different abundance of the corresponding
tRNAs.
Exeptions from the universal code
Most ciliates have only 1 translation-stop
codon. 2 species do not have a dedicated
stop triplet at all. Triplets UAA, UAG or
UGA may either encode an amino acid or
serve as the stop, dependent on whether
they locate somewhere inside the mRNA
sequence or close to its end (near the
poly-A tail).
From DNA sequence to protein sequence
Both DNA strands are coding. For a particular gene, one strand is
coding, the other is the template. mRNA is read from the template
strand. Therefore, its sequence equals the coding strand sequence.
Transfer RNA (tRNA)
tRNA-molecules normally consist of 73 to 95 nucleotides. Pairing of
some of the bases causes the typical clover leaf* construction. Up to
20% of bases in mRNA are present in modified forms (e.g., as
methylguanine (Gm)). In addition, there are some other modified bases
such as pseudouridine (Ψ) in the shown example of RNA for
phenylalanine. Even thymidine (in RNA normally replaced by U) can
appear. Translation of all 51 amino acid-coding triplets requires 31
different tRNAs.
Code redundency reduces 61 triplets to 20 amino acids.
8
Definitions
• Genetics (Bateson 1905) from the Greek genesis = origin; the science of inheritance
• Gene (historical definition by Johannsen 1909): a heritable factor that influences a heritable
trait. A gene resides at a fixed place (locus) on a chromosome.
• Trait: heritable property, e.g., flower colour, handedness*, coat texture
• Form of trait: e.g., red, lefthanded, curly
• Allele: 1 of several forms of a gene. Different alleles are mutually exclusive genetic markers
and originate from gene mutations. An allele encodes a distinct form of trait
• Genome (Winkler 1920): term for, dependent on the context, the whole DNA or geneencoding portion of the DNA of an organism
• Genotype: the entirety of genetic information carried by an organism
• Phenotype: the observable structural and functional properties of an organism, which are
dependent on both its genetical potential (genotype) and the environment
• Gene pool: the whole genetic information that is stored in all alleles of all genes of a sexually
reproducing population
Definitions of a gene
The historical definition (from Johannsen) is that a gene is a heritable factor that influences a
heritable trait, which roughly means 1 gene = 1 trait. The genetical definition (Benzer 1957) is that a
gene is a region on a DNA or
RNA, which encodes a specific
trait and is not genetically
separable (cistron). Mutations
within a cistron cannot
complement each other → 1
gene = 1 trait is not always valid.
Uncovering the genetic code led to molecular definitions:
1. A gene is a sequence of bases on DNA, which is translated into a sequence of amino acids (1
gene = 1 protein) – not true to new definitions
2. A gene is a DNA sequence, which is responsible for the formation of a RNA
3. A gene is a specific sequence of nucleotides along a DNA (or RNA) molecule, which is
responsible for a heritable trait.
This is the most comprehensive definition. It categorizes genes as such that encode polypeptides
(structural genes), genes that are transcribed but not translated (e.g., tRNA and rRNA genes), and
genes whose function does not require their transcription (e.g., sequences needed for transcription
regulation)
9
Only a fraction of the human genome encodes proteins
The translation of DNA into a protein sequence is not precisely 1:1
mRNA and even amino acids may be modified after transcription or translation by the activity of
other genes or enzymes in a way that their sequences deviate from the base sequence on the DNA.
10
Genetics 2
The transmission of hereditary material to daughter cells
Mitosis produces 2 cells with the same chromosome number as the progenitor* cell (2n in diploid
organisms). Meiosis produces cells with half of the chromosome number of the progenitor cell.
Meiosis is essential for the production of gametes. During mitosis and meiosis, chromosomes appear
as compact structures with densely packed DNA. In non-dividing interphase-cells, hereditary material
is present in an uncoiled form as chromatin.
The division of chromosomes (mitosis)
The function of mitosis is the transmission of identical
hereditary information to 2 daughter cells. The partition of
genetic material is a multiple step process (image on the
right). A chromatid is half a chromosome.
Mitotic cell divisions lead to clonal (vegetative)
multiplication (proliferation) on unicellular organisms and
the growth (from zygote to adult) in multicellular organisms. Human adults develop from ~44 division
steps of a zygote. Mitotic cell division does also cell regeneration in some organs and wound healing.
Mitosis is a characteristic feature of eukaryotes
In prokaryotes (bacteria, archaea), the genome is not separated from the rest of the
cell by a membrane, i.e., they don´t have a nucleus and they don´t possess
membrane-bound organelles. Their genetic material is a long (mostly) ring-shaped
DNA molecule which is strongly entangled in a subregion of the cell, the nucleoid.
DNA is not further packaged during division. The division of prokaryotes is not
called mitosis because it is lacking some characteristics. These are the packaging
and shortening of chromosomes, the involvement of a spindle apparatus and the
functional separation of the genome and the cell.
The stages of mitosis
• Prophase: centrioles (only in animals and fungi) divide and migrate to
opposite positions on the nuclear surface. The nuclear envelope and
the nucleolus dissolve. Chromosomes compact and become visible.
• Prometaphase: spindle fibres attach to centrosome (kinetochores)
and move chromosomes toward the cell equator.
• Metaphase: the centrosomes of chromosomes are assembled at the
“equatorial plate”. Chromosomes are maximally shortened and their
composition of 2 parallel sister chromatids being connected at the
centromeres can be recognized.
• Anaphase: the connection at centrosomes is released and the
chromatids migrate to opposite poles.
• Telophase: chromatids have arrived at the poles. A new envelope
forms around the 2 (now daughter) nuclei. Chromosomes despiralize
and a new nucleus is formed.
The mitotic spindle
Definition centromere and kinetochore. The centromere is the chromosomal region where
microtubules attach and move the chromosome during the division. It appears as a constriction in
the chromosome. The kinetochore is the protein complex at the centromere, which is necessary for
11
microtubule attachment and movement. Microtubules are stiff.
They shorten and lengthen by polymerisation and
depolymerisation.
The spindle apparatus
Fibre bundles of molecules are arranged in the shape of a spindle
during cell divisions. Microtubules consist of dimers of α and β
tubulin. They do not contract elastically. The spindle apparatus
consists of kinetochore fibres, astral fibres, and polar fibres.
Kinetochore fibres extend between poles (no centrosomes and
centrioles in plants) and the kinetochores. The elongation of kinetochore fibres during prometaphase
pushes chromosomes towards the cellular equator whereas their shortening and sliding along each
other during anaphase pulls chromatids to the poles. Astral fibres anchor the spindle apparatus
within the cell. Polar fibres counteract the pulling force of kinetochore fibres and push poles apart.
This causes the separation of chromatids not only by the shortening of the kinetochore fibres
(anaphase A) but also by the increase of distance between the poles and the kinetochores attached
to them (anaphase B).
Mechanisms of chromosome movement
During prometaphase chromosomes are pushed (not only at kinetochores)
towards the equator, by microtubules polymerizing at plus-ends and by MTassociated motor proteins. During anaphase chromosomes are pulled by
depolymerization of microtubules (MT) at kinetochores (1), by the movement of
kinetochore fibres along other MTs by MT-associated motor proteins (2) and by
pushing apart the poles (3). It is important that this step is done correctly to avoid
aneuploidies. MT-associated motor proteins are minus-end directed (e.g.,
dyneins) or plus-end directed (kinesins). If chromosomes would not
separate the cell wall would be pulled to the centre.
Cohesion* and segregation of chromatids
The cohesion of sister chromatids (half chromosomes) and the temporally well controlled loss of
sister chromatid cohesion are necessary for the coordinated separation (segregation) of all
chromatids of the cell. Cohesion along chromosome arms in prophase, whereas cohesion between
centromeres is resolved at beginning anaphase. Chromatids must separate only when they are
bound via MTs to opposite poles. Otherwise, chromatids could mis-segregate. Cohesion is caused by
the entanglement of replicated DNA molecules (DNA catenation*) and complexes of cohesion
proteins (cohesins).
Cohesin and condensin
Cohesin and condensin are related ring-shaped protein complexes of a
similar composition. They are important for the chromosome structure.
Condensin rings surround the chromatin thread and bend it into loops.
This contributes to the shortening (condensation) of the chromosomes
during mitosis. Cohesin rings shape chromatin into loops as well. This
serves the functional separation of chromatin subunits. Most
importantly, however, they connect sister chromatids (cohesion). They
prevent the precocious* separation (and, thereby, possible
missegregation) of chromatids. During anaphase, cohesion rings are opened.
12
Cohesion must be completely resolved only when
kinetochores are oriented towards opposite poles
(stepwise resolution of cohesion along chromosome
arms). Cohesin is replaced by condensin, the
chromosomes shorten. Spin fibres pull chromatids
to opposite poles (not learn the names).
The mitotic cell cycle
Meristematic* cells pass through a sequence of
growth during interphase (G1, S, G2) and division in
mitosis (cell cycle). During interphase DNA is
replicated and transcription and protein synthesis
take place. The cell cycle is meticulously
regulated, and the processes of each stage must
be completed before the next stage begins. Cells
that stop dividing (e.g., in some tissues of adult
multicellular organisms) persist in the G0 stage of
interphase. At some points (checkpoints) of the
cell cycle, the internal and external conditions for
continuing the cell cycle are evaluated. At the G1/S
checkpoint (aka restriction point) the cell decides
whether it will enter another round. The cell cycle can be (transiently) halted at additional
checkpoints.
Cyclins control the cell cycle. Cyclical changes in the concentration of regulator proteins, the cyclins,
serve as a pacemaker for the cell cycle. Cyclins are proteins whose concentration changes
periodically during the cell cycle. D- and E- cyclins control cell growth at the beginning of a cycle.
Cyclin-A controls DNA replication in S-phase.
B-cyclins trigger mitotic processes such as:
disintegration of the nuclear membrane,
formation of the spindle and chromosome
packaging.
Protein kinases (enzymes that transfer energy rich phosphate residue to a substrate molecule) whose
activity is dependant on cyclins (cycklin dependant kinases – CDKs) and phosphatases activate or
inactivate proteins which have functions at certain
stages of the cell cycle. One of the numerous cyclinCDK complexes is MPF, the mitosis (or maturation)
promoting factor (main switch for entering mitosis).
The periodical formation of the cyclin-CDK
complexes using the example of MPF is shown in
the right image.
DNA damage checkpoints
DNA damage checkpoints monitor DNA damage or
incomplete DNA replication and (transiently*) arrest the
cell cycle to buy time for the cell to make appropriate
measures (e.g., repair or apoptosis). This can be also
called “Rettungskette” (due to the professor
not finding a good English word).
13
The spindle checkpoint
The spindle checkpoint is also called the spindle assembly checkpoint
(SAC). During mitosis chromosomes initially attack randomly to
microtubules. At the spindle checkpoint division is delayed until all
chromosomes are correctly attached to the spindle. Otherwise,
chromosomes could become distributed incorrectly.
A kinase between sister chromatids phosphorylates and inactivates
components of the kinetochores. Microtubules cannot stably*
attach to the inactive kinetochore. Incorrect orientated (monopolar)
microtubules that pull sister chromatids in the same direction detach
after a while (A). Microtubules attach and detach repeatedly, and
the play continues until microtubules from opposite poles (bipolar
microtubules) happen to attach (B). This
generates tension on the centromeres (C),
and kinetochores are pulled away from the
kinase. Thereupon the kinase can no longer
destabilize the attachment of microtubules.
This prevents destabilization of correctly
orientated microtubules and anaphase can
begin. At the same time, kinetochore dephosphorylation is the signal for the release of sister
chromatid cohesion (B-C).
Meiosis
Meiosis is an indispensable part of the sexual reproduction cycle.
Meiosis reverses the doubling of the chromosome set at fertilization. The
sexual reproduction cycle is also called the ploidy cycle. In evolutionary
advanced organisms, the diploid phase of
the life cycle is prevalent (diploidy is an
advantage → rescue copy). In haplonts
(many protists and algae) mitosis occurs only
in the haploid generation. In haplo-diplonts
(plants) both the haploid and diploid
generation and in diplonts (animals) only in
the diploid generation.
The functions of meiosis are reduction, recombination, and regeneration (only a theoretical
consideration). During reduction the diploid chromosome set of somatic cells is reduced to the
haploid chromosome set of gamete cells. Recombination of the parental genomes and generation
leads to a genetic variety in offspring by the random distribution of parental chromosomes to
gametes and by the exchange of parts of parental chromosomes (crossing over). Regeneration is the
rejuvenation of cells and genomes by increased repair activity and elimination of mutational load due
to selection of intact genomes in haploid gametes.
Meiotic defects
Meiotic defects cause miscarriages, stillbirth* and congenital* diseases in humans. Around ¼ of all
clinically detected pregnancies are miscarriages. Chromosomal anomalies following defective meiosis
are the cause of 2/3 of miscarriages. The proportion of chromosomal anomalies has increased over
the last decades as a consequence of increasing maternal age.
14
Mitosis and meiosis compared
The stages of meiosis
Prophase is divided into substages. These are:
• Leptonema: chromatids begin to shorten and become visible as thin
threads
• Zygonema: homologous chromosomes recognize each other and pair
starting from their ends. The synaptonemal complex forms between
homologous chromosomes. Crossing over is initiated at some sites
• Pachynema: pairing extends over the entire length of chromosomes.
All chromosomes have completed crossing over
• Diplonema: the synaptonemal complex is degraded. Homologous
chromosomes begin to disjoin and remain connected at crossover
sites. These sites are called chiasma (pl: chiasmata/chiasmas). Pairs
15
of chromosomes are called bivalents. Now the microscope shows that each chromosome
consists of 2 chromatids (4 chromatids per bivalent)
• Diakinesis: the nuclear membrane is degraded, and the spindle
apparatus is formed. Chromosomes are maximally shortened.
The 2 divisions resemble the steps of mitosis.
First division
During metaphase I pared chromosomes assemble in the equatorial plane. In
anaphase I chromosome pairs separate and recombined chromosomes migrate to
the poles of the cell. During telophase I/interkinesis the chromosomes have arrived
at the poles. New nuclear membranes are formed (some species form cell walls
between daughter nuclei at this point) chromosomes uncoil transiently. Replication
does not take place because chromosomes consist of 2 chromosomes already.
Nuclei are now haploid.
Second division
During metaphase II the chromosomes shorten again. They consist of 2 chromatids
which are connected at the centromeres. The nuclear membrane is degraded. The
spindle becomes reorganized. Chromosomes occupy the metaphase plate at the cell
equator. In anaphase II sister chromatids migrate to opposite poles. During
telophase II chromatids have arrived at the poles. Nuclear membranes are formed
and chromosomes uncoil.
Pairing
Pairing of homologous chromosomes is
essential for their segregation of daughter
nuclei. Pairing consists of multiple steps.
These are:
1. Chromosome ends move to the
nuclear periphery. Homologous chromosomes become loosely associated
2. Recognition and association of homologous DNA sequences takes place at several sites of the
genome
3. A protein complex, the synaptonemal complex, is formed and stabilizes chromosome pairing
The detailed mechanisms by which homologous chromosomes recognize each other for pairing are
not yet fully understood.
Homology search
A complex of transmembrane proteins link chromosome ends to motor proteins in the cytoplasm.
This allows movements of chromosomes inside the nucleus that are needed for homologous partner
searching. In the course of this movement in zygonema, chromosomes form the bouquetarrangement. In the bouquet all chromosome ends (telomers) assemble within a small area at the
nuclear envelope. This probably facilitates partner recognition.
The synaptonemal complex
Synaptonemal complexes (SCs) are ladder-like protein structures
that connect homologous chromosomes during meiotic prophase.
The 2 chromatids of each chromosome are held together by
cohesins and at the same time attached to a lateral element.
Lateral elements, and with them, the homologous chromosomes,
are linked by transversal filaments. At some sites, a DNA-strand
runs across the SC, to exchange strands with a homologous DNA
16
molecule (crossing over). Recombination proteins involved in this process form the recombination
nodule.
The modes of meiotic recombination
Crossing over
Meiotic crossing over begins with programmed DNA double-stranded
breaks (DSBs). Separation of DNA from whole chromosomes by gelelectrophoresis. Chromosomal DNA migrates in an electrical field
according to its size (small chromosomes migrate faster and farther). DNA
of meiotic cells runs as transient “smears” due to the formation of
variable-size DNA fragments.
Despite the threat to genome integrity, DNA double-stranded breaks
are deliberately included in meiosis. The protein Spo11 cuts in a trans
esterase reaction the phosphodiester backbone of DNA. Thereby
Spo11 becomes covalently bound to the 5’ end of a DNA strand
via a tyrosine side chain and an ester bond. This process occurs
in both DNA strands.
DSBs may be repaired in different ways, however, in meiosis,
only the healing via the homologous chromosome as repair
template is desired. On the next page are
different meiotic recombination-pathways.
17
The image below shows the chiasma transition between pachynema and diplonema/diakinesis.
Chiasmata
Chiasmata (or chiasmas, sing: chiasma) are the cytologically visible consequence of crossovers in
diplonema and diakinesis. They mark the sites of crossovers. After degradation of the synaptonemal
complex, they take over the connection of homologous chromosomes with the help of cohesins. Only
2 of the 4 chromatids of a bivalent participate in a crossover. A bivalent has at least one crossover,
sometimes more. These are randomly
assigned to chromatids.
Crossover frequencies between marker genes can be expressed as genetic linkage maps. The
frequency of crossover events between 2 genetic loci is an indirect measure of their distance within a
chromosome.
An uneven distribution of
crossovers/chiasmata on and between
chromosomes by (image on the right):
18
Meiotic segregation
At least one chiasma is required for the
cohesion of homologous chromosomes
and their faithful distribution. Resolution
of cohesion in 2 steps coordinates the 1st
and 2nd meiotic division.
Spermatogenesis and oogenesis
The development of male gametes
(spermatogenesis) and female gametes
(oogenesis) proceeds differently aiming
at the production of small mobile
spermatozoa and large nutrient-rich
oocytes. Also plants possess gametes of different appearance and function (anisogamy).
Spermatogenesis
An undifferentiated germ cell, the spermatogonium, enlarges and becomes the primary
spermatocyte. It undergoes meiosis I and forms haploid secondary spermatocytes. These perform
meiosis II and produce 4 haploid spermatids. These differentiate during spermiogenesis into
spermatozoa.
Oogenesis
An undifferentiated germ cell, the oogonium, enlarges and becomes the primary oocyte. Meiosis I
produce 2 haploid cells of different sizes, the secondary oocyte and the first polar body. The polar
body (may or may not perform meiosis II) is subsequently degraded. The secondary oocyte performs
meiosis II and produces the large ootide and the secondary polar body. The ootide maturates into
the ovum. Anaphase II ensues* only after contact with a spermatozoon.
Spermatogenesis and oogenesis in mammals/humans
19
Genetics 3
The central dogma
The many functions of DNA
The DNA fulfils the requirements for a carrier of genetic information. It can save information,
multiply and pass on (replication) and make that information available. The structure of DNA is key to
understanding all of these functions. A human sperm nucleus carries the information equivalent of
almost 40mb in a volume of approximately 30µm3
. That is 3mil times the storage density of an SD
card.
DNA is composed of nucleotides
A nucleoside is a sugar and a base, e.g., Deoxyadenosine. A nucleotide
is a sugar, a base, and a phosphate group, e.g., Deoxyadenosine 5’ –
monophosphate.
The DNA is composed of 4 types of nucleotides, the bases. The
purines are adenine and guanine, and the pyrimidines are thymine,
cytosine and replacing the thymine in the RNA the uracil.
The bases covalently attach through phosphodiester bonds. By
splitting of a pyrophosphate, a
triphosphate is attached to the 3’
carbon of a resulting nucleic acid
chain, and a phosphodiester bond
connects the 5’ and the 3’ C-atoms
of consecutive pentoses. For the
DNA dATP is used and phosphate
groups provide energy for making
the string longer → long chain.
Across different species there are different amounts of bases. But there is 1 constant. It is that the
number of As is equal to the number of Ts. The same goes for the number of Cs and Gs.
DNA double helix
The structure of the double helix was “discovered” by Francis Crick (X-ray crystallographer) and
James Watson (Biologist) with the work from Rosalind Franklin (X-ray crystallographer). X-ray
diffraction* patterns gave information of the dimensions of DNA. They answered the questions about
the amount of the strands of the helix, the running direction of those strands, their location on the
20
inside or the outside and how the 4 chemical bases were arranged. The image on the
right shows “Photo 51”, done by Rosalind Franklins and her graduate student Raymond
Gosling. Such a photo is made by crystalizing a lot of DNA and then making an image. A
pattern repeats every 3.4nm which suggests a
helical structure.
The nucleotide chains of the DNA are polar.
DNA and RNA sequences are always written in
the 5’-3’ direction. This is the direction in
which they are extended. In DNA double
strands, the 2 strands run in opposite
directions. Hydrogen bonds between the
bases connect the 2 strands.
There are 2 types of DNA base pairs. The first
one is the adenine-thymine base pair (2
hydrogen bonds) and the second one is the
guanine-cytosine base pair (3
hydrogen bonds). Always a
purine (A, G) and a pyrimidine
(C, T, U) are paired. These
pairs make the fixed width of
the crystal structure. A DNA
with more G-C bonds is a
tighter DNA.
DNA replication
“It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately
suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material.” (Crick, Watson,
Nature, 1953).
The DNA sequence is duplicated through base pairing. It is done semi-conservative.
Steps of DNA replication
DNA replication consists of 5 steps. These are:
1. Origin licensing (origin of replication only once per cell cycle)
2. Origin firing
3. DNA unwinding
4. RNA priming
5. DNA polymerization
DNA replication in bacteria
The replication begins at the origin of replication (oriC). There the double
helix begins to wind into its individual strands. Replication is bidirectional,
hence 2 replication forks flank* the origin. A replication bubble develops. In
bacteria, 1 origin (oriC) is sufficient to replicate the entire circular genome
(approximately 4.6mil base pairs in E. coli). The DNA synthesis rate is around
900 bases/s. The entire process (replication + cell division) takes about
20min for E. coli.
Eukaryotic chromosomes
Eukaryotic chromosomes have many origins
of replication. To speed things up, eukaryotes
have multiple origins of replication.
21
Origin licensing and firing
To ensure that every region of DNA is replicated a single time, each origin must
fire a single time in each cell cycle. To accomplish this, each origin is prepared or
“licensed” to fire only in the G1 stage by recruitment of the Origin Recognition
Complex (ORC). Then, in S phase, the origin “fires” to unwind the DNA and initiate
replication.
Helicases
The MCM helicase unwinds the DNA to give the polymerase access to single
stranded DNA (ssDNA).
RNA priming
DNA polymerases cannot start DNA synthesis de novo,
they need an OH end to add a nucleotide. Therefore, a
short piece of RNA (~10 nucleotides) must first bind to
the template DNA as a primer. This RNA is synthesized by
an RNA polymerase, primase. These RNA primers are then removed and replaced with DNA. This
must be done because the RNA primase makes a lot of mistakes (?).
Polymerases
A template sequence, and RNA primer sequence complementary to the template,
deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dATP, dTTP, dCTP, dGTP) and DNA polymerases are required for
DNA synthesis. When a nucleotide is added, the 2
terminal phosphates are cleaved off and the new
link in the chain again offers a 3’-OH group to
which the next nucleotide can be attached.
Discontinuous replication
Since the synthesis only runs in the 5’-3’ direction, it can only take
place continuously on 1 strand. When the replication bubble or
replication fork grows, further primers must constantly bind to the
lagging strand (discontinuous synthesis), whereas synthesis
proceeds from the same primer on the leading strand (continuous
replication).
Topoisomerases
Topoisomerases relieve tension created
during replication. The separation of the
strands by the helicase causes increasing
screwing* (supercoiling) in the subsequent
region. The resulting tensions hinders further
separation and must therefore be resolved.
Bringing it all together
All together is shown on the image on the right.
Telomeres
DNA synthesis at the end of the chromosome is a
problem because when the RNA primer is gone, there
is no free 3’ hydroxyl group to which a nucleotide
22
could be attached. As a result, newly synthesized DNA strands shorten by
about 10-100 nucleotides in each round of replication.
The telomeres at the ends of the chromosomes are repetitive DNA
sequences. A ribonucleoprotein (telomerase ( a reverse transcriptase))
extends the 3’ ends of DNA at the ends of chromosomes. Telomerase RNA
serves as a template for the syntesis of the
complementary telomere DNA sequence (this is an
example of reverse transcription – an exception of the
“Central Dogma” of genetic information flow). This
creates single-stranded 3’ overgangs, to which RNA
primers bind again in the next S-phase and can fill the
gap.
Replication factories in the nucleus
The DNA polymerase machinery forms foci within the
nucelus during DNA replication where many active
polymerases are all conducting DNA replications in the
same area. The purpose of the polymerases coming
together into these factories is still largely unclear.
DNA vs RNA
Transcription
Transcription is performed by RNA polymerase
RNA polymerases are recruited to promoter regions of genes, where they initiate transcription. There
are 3 phases of transcription. They are:
1. Initiation: Transcription starts at the transcription start site.
The DNA double helix is unwound to expose the template
strand for RNA polymerase.
2. Elongation: The polymerase traverses* the length of the
gene, synthesizing RNA until it encounters a termination
sequence.
3. Termination: After the polymerase encounters a
termination sequence, it falls of the DNA.
23
Transcriptional promoters
A promoter is a region of DNA that is recognized
by the transcription machinery ant to which
proteins bind to activate transcription. In
general, everything is regulated by promoters.
Initiation factors bind to promoters
In eukaryotes, the pre-initiation complex (PIC) binds to promoter regions and recruit
RNA polymerases. The PIC recruited by transcription factors that regulate gene
expression.
The many functions of RNA
Post-transcriptional modifications of mRNAs
The immediate product of transcription is the premRNA. This must be processed into mature mRNA by:
• 5’-capping
• 3’-polyadenylation
• Splicing (depending on species)
• mRNA editing (sometimes)
Capping and polyadenylation
3’-polyadenylation is adding adenines at the end
(make a Poly-A-tail) for stability.
24
Splicing
Parts of the open reading frame of
most genes are non-coding
(introns). They are transcribed and
then excised* from the pre-mRNA.
The remaining coding parts are
called exons. Not all eukaryotes
have introns, e.g., a type of yeast.
Introns start with GU and end with AG. A
spliceosome finds the introns and detaches it
and instead of reattaching it, it attaches it to
itself → the 2 exons are attached.
Why have introns?
There are several theories why introns exist.
Some of them are:
• Alternative splicing – multiple different proteins can be made from the same pre-mRNA with
different combinations of introns
• Shuffling of exons between different genes during evolution to create new proteins
• Increase expression levels of genes with introns (or decrease expression of viral genes
without introns)
• Selfish DNA elements (put themselves into genes → had to be removed)?
Translation
Translation is the process of using the information from an mRNA to create a protein. Components
which are needed for translation are mRNA, ribosomes and tRNA amino acid complexes.
The genetic code
All living things have a triplet genetic code, such that
every 3 bases code for 1 amino acid. Each 3 base
combination is called a codon. There are more codons
(64) than amino acids, so some amino acids can be made
by more than 1 codon. Genes almost always start with an
AUG, which codes for methionine (the sequence before
the start codon is the 5’ UTR). There are 3 different stop
codons, which signal the end of translation of the mRNA
(the sequence after this point is the 3’ UTR).
Ribosomes
In eukaryotes, the small ribosome subunit first binds to the 5’ methylguanosine cap and scans the
mRNA until it encounters a matching AUG. The first amino acid of the resulting chain is methionine
(coded by ATG/AUG). In most proteins, it is
removed after translation. The tRNA that
matches the second codon comes next.
The first elongation step begins with the
peptide bond between the first and the
second amino acid.
25
Start and stop codons
To determine which AUG to use as the start codon,
ribosomes look for a consensus* sequence among surrounding
bases calles the Kozak sequence (only in eukaryotes). Stop
codons only terminate translation if they are in frame.
tRNAs
tRNAs bring the amino acids (aa) to the ribosomes for the synthesis of
proteins. Aminoacyl tRNA synthases recharge tRNAs by using ATP to add an
amino acid to the acceptor end.
Peptide bond formation
During translation, protein chains are formed by dehydrating the bond
between the carboxyl group of 1 amino acid and the amino group of the next
amino acid (peptide bond). The side chains (R) protrude from the peptide
backbone. The direction of elongation of the polypeptide is from the Nterminus to the C-terminus. The sequence
of the amino acids determines the primary
structure of the protein.
Protein folding
In addition to the sequence of amino acids in
the protein (primary structure), proteins fold
into more complex structures that allow
them to perform complex functions.
26
Genetics 4
Mutation
Mutations are a fundamental property of living systems. They create novel alleles and thus are
indispensable for the genetic variation in populations and evolution. At the level of individuals,
mutations are most often negative. They are the cause of genetic alterations that can lead to cell
death, heritable diseases, and cancer.
A mutation is an alteration of a DNA sequence. Mutations can appear in coding or noncoding regions
of a genome. Mutations may, but do not necessarily, cause visible changes of the phenotype.
Mutations can be heritable if they occur of the germline, or non-heritable if they affect somatic cells.
In humans, autosomal mutations affect genes on autosomes (non-sex chromosomes), X-linked
mutations affect genes on the X chromosome. Y-linked mutations are extremely rare and mainly
cause infertility.
Classification of mutations by different criteria
Dominant and recessive mutations
A dominant mutation affects the phenotype, even when present only heterozygous, i.e., in 1 of the 2
copies of the genome of a diploid organism. A recessive mutation in a diploid cell does not normally
affect the phenotype if it is heterozygous. It may go unnoticed for many generations until an
offspring individual inherits the mutated allele from both its parents. This individual is homozygous
for the mutation and displays the mutant phenotype. Dominant means that if 1 copy is mutated, one
can see the difference.
Size of affected region and their most common causes
Substitutions, deletions, and insertions are gene mutations. Substitution is the replacement of a DNA
base by another one (point mutation). Causes are mutagenic substances and replication errors. At
deletion or insertion, 1 or more base pairs are removed or added. Causes are mutagenetic
substances and replication errors. Chromosome mutations are changes in the chromosome
structure. Causes are a defective recombination or repair of DNA breaks. Genome mutations are
changes in the chromosome number. Causes are mis-segregation in mitosis or meiosis.
Phenotypical effects
Loss-of-function mutations (null-mutations) replace or completely prevent the function of a gene
product. Lethal mutations disturb an essential process and are incompatible with life → organism will
die. Gain-of-function-mutations create a gene product with a novel or enhanced function (important
for evolution). Neutral mutations do not influence the phenotype because they may affect a
noncoding portion of the genome or a redundant gene. Most mutations fall into this category.
Conditional mutations display a phenotype dependent on external (environmental) conditions, e.g.,
temperature sensitive alleles. These are functional only within a certain (normally lower)
temperature range. Siam-cats possess a temperature-sensitive allele of the tyrosine kinase gene with
an early function in pigment formation. The protein functions only in cool body parts. The other parts
display an albino phenotype.
Spontaneous emergence of a metabolic mutant in haploid baker’s yeast
Mutated cells with an enzymatic defect are unable to synthetize the base adenine and accumulate a
coloured precursor thereof*. Therefore, red cell colonies are formed. However, adenine must be
present in the growth medium for these cells to be viable. This mutation produces a phenotype in
haploid cells. In diploid cells, the presence of an intact allele would rescue the wild-type appearance
→ such a mutation is recessive. Mutations are mostly only detected in haploid cells because in
diploid ones is a rescue copy.
27
Do mutations occur at random or due to selective pressure? – The Luria-Delbrück
Fluctuation test
During cultivation, prior to the contact with pages, a few cells experience random mutations that
make them resistant to phages. They pass on this resistance to progeny cells. Therefore, sometimes
there can be many resistant cells on a plate. The sooner the mutation occurred in culture, the more
resistant offspring will arise and form visible colonies on the plate. The fluctuation test shows that
mutations occur random.
The incidence of mutations varies strongly between organisms and genetic loci within an
organism
The table shows examples of the incidence
of mutants (a mutation is an event, and a
mutant is the carrier of this mutation). These
are due to spontaneous phenotypically
manifested mutations. Some DNA sequences, e.g., repeats, are more susceptible to mutations, and in
genes that are encoded by long sequences, mutations are more frequent because they are a large
target for random changes.
Incidence of gene mutations in baker´s yeast
A certain base pair changes in 1 out of 3-5*1010 (30-60 billion) progeny.
28
Incidence of gene mutations in humans
Each person receives ~55 mutations from their father and ~14
from their mother. Older fathers pass on more mutations than
younger fathers. This is because sperm cells are being
produces continuously and so more mistakes can be made –
sperm cells come from a higher number of divisions. For
mothers, there is only a small age dependent effect on the
inheritance of point mutations. However, more striking agedependent problems exist in mothers. Most harmful mutations are eliminated right away. A human
genome has around 150-180 nonsense mutations (no problem because of the 2nd copy).
Review
Due to the redundency of the genetic code, the
substitution of individual bases does not
necessarily cause a higher change in the amino
acid sequence of a protein.
There are different consequences of base
substitutions on a gene product.
Triggers of gene mutations
Endogenous causes
These are inevitable because replication by itself is an error-prone process and DNA, as a complex
molecule, is subject to ageing and decay. Replication errors are due to:
• Mistakes made by polymerases (around 99% of mistakes made by polymerases are corrected
by proofreading and mismatch repair)
• Spontaneous conformational changes of bases (tautomerisms; corrected by mismatch repair)
• Spontaneous desamination and depurination of bases by hydrolysis
• Replication slippage at base pairs
Errors in the repair of exogenously triggered DNA damage. Transposon-insertion is when mobile DNA
sequences can insert into a gene and change its sequence. About 1:10.000 DNA replications is wrong
(repaired by proofreading activity). Afterwards 1:1.000.000.000 is still wrong.
Exogenous causes (natural and human made (external))
There are chemical mutagens and high-energy radiation. Chemical mutagens are alkylating or
oxidative substances, base analogs or intercalating substances. Under high-energy radiation fall
gamma rays, X-rays, and UV-radiation. They can be terrestrial or cosmic and act in 2 ways. The 1st is
directly by induction of breaks in DNA and the
2
nd is indirectly by the formation of cellular
oxygen radicals. Despite Chernobyl and
Fukushima these are hardly important. A 10h
flight makes on double strand break in 1:500
cells which is less than the frequency of a
normal mutation.
29
Replication errors due to tautomerization
Tautomeres are isomeric (same totals formula, different structural
formula) molecules that can easily transit into one another due to the
translocation of single atoms or residues*. They exist in certain ratios.
For guanine, the keto-form predominates, but molecules switch
temporarily to the enol-form all the time. Tautomeric forms do exist
in all bases.
The image below shows the replacement of guanine by adenine after
2 replication cycles via the enol-form of guanine. After the replication
1 cell will be wrong due to the spontanious tautomerisation (most
mismatches are recognized during relication and corrected my
mismatch repair. The few remaining ones cause base substitutions).
Hydraulic fission*
Shift of the reading frame (frameshift) due to an error during replication (replication slippage)
30
Dimerization of consecutive bases
If consecutive bases dimerize, the hydrogen bonds
with the complementary (opposite) bases are lost.
This causes a frameshift during replication. This is
a frequent mutagenic effect of UV-radiation.
Cyclobutene rings (A) or 6-4-photoreactin products
(B) are formed between consecutive bases, in
particular thymines and rarely cytosines.
Base alteration due to exogenous factors
These are done by oxidation by free radicals upon ionizing radiation or
chemicals. Oxidated guanine (oxoguanine) can pair with cytosine or
adenine. In the latter case this leads to the incorporation of thymine
after 2 rounds of replication. This C:G → T:A transversion is one of the
most frequent mutations found in human tumours. Alkylation
(methylation or ethylation) is caused by e.g., nitrosamine of
methylmethansulfonate (MMS, an experimental mutagen).
Ethylguanine pairs with thymine and ethylthymine pairs with guanine.
Intercalating substances
The incorporation (intercalation*) of planar molecules between neighbouring base pairs leads to
structural changes of the double helix. This can cause a frameshift with gain or loss of 1 or several
bases during replication. Ethidium bromide, proflavine, acridine orange are intercalating substances
used in molecular biology.
The Ames-Test for mutagenic substances
When bacteria carrying a mutation are exposed to a mutagen,
another mutation may recover a function that was lost
because of the 1st mutation (here it is the ability to grow in the
absence of histidine = Histidine-Prototrophy): revertants* are
created. The Ames-Test determines the mutagenicity of a
substance by way of the formation of revertants.
Substances may have different effects on bacteria and
humans. In particular, substances can be decomposed or,
conversely, turned into mutagens via metabolism in the liver.
Therefore, liver extract, whose enzymes simulate liver
functions, is added to the bacterial culture.
Mutations caused by transposons
Transposable elements (transposons) are chunks of DNA that can change their genomic position
within and between chromosomes (transposition). They were first described as "Jumping Genes" in
maize by Barbara McClintock.
Transposons have been found in all organisms.
Transposons are mutagenic. Insertion into the coding region of a gene may disrupt the gene and
prevent its normal expression. Insertion into a promoter may after the strength of expression of a
gene. Insertion into introns may influence gene splicing or cause precocious termination of
transcription.
Nearly half of the human genome consists of transposons (as opposed to only ca. 1-2% coding
sequences). However, most of the transposons in humans are probably inactive.
Due to their ability to alter genes and chromosomes, transposons play an important role in evolution.
31
There are retrotransposons (class I), which use RNA as the
mobile intermediate, and DNA transposons (class II).
Retrotransposons are related to RNA viruses. They perform
reverse transcription, in order to produce DNA from an RNA
template. This leads to an increase of transposon copies in
the genome. In contrast, DNA transposons leave the original
position.
Transposons are DNA stretches that can change their
position within the genome (transposition). It is likely
that they originated from viruses. They are a class of
selfish DNA.
DNA repair and recombination
Some DNA repair systems
Faulty DNA repair mechanisms cause proneness* to
various types of cancer and are the cause of a
number of hereditary diseases, e.g., Fanconi's
anaemia, Ataxia telangiectasia, Xeroderma
pigmentosum, in humans. After proofreading
1:1.000.000.000 is wrong and after mismatch
repair only 1:50.000.000.000 is wrong. These will
be inherited.
Mismatch repair of incorrectly incorporated
nucleotides
99% of incorrectly incorporated nucleotides are
corrected by proofreading by the polymerase
during replication. Most of the remaining
mistakes are repaired subsequently. The
problem is which of the non-matching nucleotides is the wrong one? Often,
the mismatch repair system recognizes the old (correct) strand via its
methylated bases. The new non-methylated strand is cut at such methylation
sites and a section encompassing* the faulty pairing is removed.
Subsequently, the gap is filled by DNA polymerase III dependent synthesis.
Photo-reactivation-repair of pyrimidine-dymers
This is found in many bacteria, plants and animals, but not in humans. 2
consecutive thymines are forming a dimer. Photoreactivation enzyme (PRE)
associates with the thymine-dimer. It requires a photon to disconnect the
dimer. Hydrogen bonds with complementary bases in the old strand are reestablished.
Base excision repair
It is found in bacteria and eukaryotes. It repairs DNA with a faulty base.
DNA glycosylases recognize faulty bases and cut them off. Next, the
base-less sugar is recognized and resected* by endonucleases. The
resulting gap is filled up with the complementary nucleotide by DNA
polymerase and ligase.
32
Nucleotide excision repair
It is found in bacteria and, in a more complicated form, in eukaryotes. It repairs
defects that affect more than 1 consecutive nucleotide after the shape of the double
helix. Around 10-30 nucleotides around the defective site are resected. Similar to
mismatch repair, the resulting gap is filled up with the help of DNA polymerase I and
the ends are connected by ligase.
SOS-response and translesion-synthesis
This is when the worst comes to the worst. If the repair of extensive defects
is not possible, bacteria try to replicate DNA across the defected region (the
lesion). To this end, DNA polymerase III is replaced by other polymerases
(SOS-response). These polymerases do not require complementary bases for
DNA synthesis and mostly incorporate nucleotides arbitrarily. This causes a
mutation in the new DNA of a daughter cell, but it may be better than
producing no progeny cell at all.
Repair of double strandes breaks
Double stranded breaks (DSBs) are the most dangerous type of DNA damage.
Their frequency (in mammals) is estimated at 10 per day per dividing cell.
There are 2 ways of repairing DSBs. The 1st one is homology independent repair and the 2nd one is
homology dependent repair (recombinational repair). At the 1st one, DSBs may be repaired by simple
but error-prone mechanisms. These are non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and single strand
annealing (SSA). NHEJ and SSA mostly take place in G1 stage of the cell cycle when there is no intact
DNA molecule available as a repair template. At the 2nd one, DSB repair via homologous
recombination (recombinational repair) is more elaborate but less at risk of producing mistakes. The
sister chromatid or a homologous chromosome can serve as a repair template. This repair may result
in the directional (non-reciprocal) or mutual (reciprocal) exchange of sequences. The non-reciprocal
ones are synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA) and break-induced replication (BIR) and the
reciprocal ones are sister chromatid exchange (SCE) and crossing over (CO).
33
Repair of programmed DSBs
Recombination processes were probably developed as early as in prokaryotes for error free repair of
DNA lesions (?). Moreover, organisms can deliberately create DSBs and utilize these self-inflicted
programmed DSBs and their repair for different purposes. These are:
• Somatic recombination for creating the huge diversity of vertebrate antibodies (V-D-J
recombination)
• Somatic recombination for creating antigenic variability of parasites
• Somatic recombination for mating type switching in yeasts
• Insertion of transposons and viruses into host DNA
• Meiotic recombination in eukaryotes
Gene technology makes use of the natural propensity to recombine for
the production of recombinant DNA. The recombinational exchange of
DNA pieces can be mutual (reciprocal) or
directed (non-reciprocal).
NHEJ repair of self-inflicted DSBs in the
somatic recombination of immunoglobulin
genes B- and T-lymphocytes
Alternative splicing of mRNA, (rare) gene
overlaps and somatic V-D-J recombination
allow organisms to produce more different
protein sequences than there are genes.
Review of mitosis
There is the repair of deliberately induced
(programmed) DSBs in meiotic
recombination. Homologous and not sister
chromosomes are used.
Differential straining of sister chromatids
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) can be
incorporated in DNA instead of thymidine.
After 1 round of replication, a chromosome
consists of 2 chromatids with 1 Thd- and
BrdU-strand each. After another round of
replication in the presence of BrdU, a
chromosome consists of a BrdU-BrdUchromatid and a Thd-BrdU-chromatid. A
special staining method reveals the
difference.
Cytological detection of reciprocal DNA
exchanges in mitosis and meiosis
Different staining of sister chromatids allows the
visualization of sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) in
mitosis and the exchange of homologous chromatids
(crossover) in meiosis.
34
Genetics 5
Mendelian Genetics
Mendel introduced experimental methods and
quantitative analysis to research on inheritance.
From his crossings of peas, he derived principles of
inheritance, known today as Mendel´s laws.
Quantitative traits are more often, e.g., skin colour.
The image below shows the result of Mendel´s
crossing of purple and white blooming garden peas.
35
F1 is heterozygous
36
The F1 is heterozygous for both alleles for colour and
shape (GELB/gelb and RUND/rund) and it can produce 4
different types of egg- or sperm-cells. These are:
GELB/RUND, GELB/rund, gelb/RUND and gelb/rund. The
frequencies of genotypes and phenotypes of the F2
follow unique ratios.
The 9:3:3:1 ratio of phenotypes following a 2-factor crossing has become an icon of Mendelian
Genetics and is found in many contexts, such as in logos of research institurions.
37
The 3rd Mendelian law is valid for multifactoral crossings. However there are also some exceptions.
Calculation of genotypes in F2 in multifactorial crosses
In crosses with many genes, the Punnet
square becomes impractical. In such
cases it is preferable to calculate the
probability of genotypes.
When independent events occur
simultaneously, the probability of the
outcomes occuring in combination is
equal to the product of their
individual probabilities of occurrence
→ product of law probability.
Summary of Mendel´s laws
1. Law of uniformity: The F1 (1st daughter generation) is uniform. (Law of reciprocity: The other
laws are valid irrespective of the parental origin of the dominant expression of a trait, i.e.,
whether father or mother is the carrier of the dominant allele)
2. Law of splitting: Crossing the uniform F1 results in splitting into different phenotypes in F2 in
unique ratios
3. Law of independence: In principle, traits are inherited independent of each other. They may
appear in novel combinations in progeny
Alternative summary of Mendel´s postulates
1. Unit factors in pairs: Genetic characters are controlled by unit factors existing in pairs in
individual organisms
2. Dominance/recessiveness: When 2 unlike unique factors responsible for a single character
are present in a single individual, 1 unit factor is dominant to the other, which is said to be
recessive
3. Segregation: During the formation of gametes, the paired unit factors separate, or segregate,
randomly so that each gamete receives 1 or the other with equal likelihood
4. Independent assortment: During gamete formation, segregating pairs of unit factors assort
independently of each other
Later geneticists gave the laws the numbers and names.
38
Extensions of Mendelian genetics
Complete dominance, partial dominance, codominance
Mendel coined the terms dominant for the form of a trait that is visible in a heterozygote, and
recessive for the hidden form. Recessive insinuates* that this form recedes or completely disappears
in the heterozygous organism. However, in the F2 it appears unchanged. In the case of complete
dominance, the phenotype of a heterozygous individual completely equals the phenotype of a
homozygous dominant individual. In the case of partial dominance, the amount of gene product of
the dominant allele is not sufficient to elicit* in the heterozygous state the same phenotype as in the
homozygous state. In the case of codominance, 2 different alleles of a gene contribute equally to the
phenotype of a heterozygous individual.
Partial/incomplete dominance
None of the 2 alleles of the gene can completely mask
(dominate) the other allele, therefore the phenotype of
heterozygous individuals is the intermediate of those of the 2
homozygous parents.
Codominance
In the case of codominance, the 2 different alleles of a gene affect the
phenotype of a heterozygous equally strongly.
Codominant expression of alleles using the example of the AB0 blood group system
Determining the genotype for a characteristic with complete dominance using a testcross (backcross)
If the F2 individual is homozygous dominant, cross with
a homozygous recessive individual (backcross) will
produce 100% heterozygous offspring, which all display
the dominant phenotype. If the individual in question is
heterozygous, this cross produces 50% homozygous
recessive offspring, which display the recessive
phenotype.
39
Polygeny
Polygeny is the contribution of multiple genes to a
trait. An example is the eye colour in Drosophila.
The normal (wild type) eye colour is caused by the
products of at least a dozen genes, including the
pigments drosopherin and Xanthommatin, and
also dependent of the product of the white gene.
The brown gene makes a pink eye colour. The
absence of the white gene makes the eye white –
the genes get the name when they are not there.
Epistasis
A gene influences the phenotypical expression of another, nonhomologous gene. An example is the mouse coat colour. Gene
B encodes pigment (B – black, b – brown) in the hair follicles. B
is dominant. The product of gene C allows the pigments to
enter hairs (C – functional, c – defective). A cc mouse will have
a white coat, irrespective of the B/b genotype. Thus, the
expression of B or b is dependent on C, i.e., gene C is epistatic
over gene B.
Complementation assay
Multiple genes can contribute to a certain trait. If 2 mutants display the same altered phenotype,
how can 1 find out whether the 2 mutations affect the same or different genes. In this case, 1 can
perform a complementation assay: the 2 (normally homozygous) mutants are crossed.
• Case 1: The mutations affect different genes: All F1 progeny will be heterozygous for both
genes, and they display the wild-type phenotype – complementation takes place
• Case 2: The 2 mutations affect the same gene: All F1 progeny will receive 2 faulty copies of
this gene and display the mutant phenotype – the mutations affect the same
complementation group
Likewise, complementation assays can reveal how
many genes contribute to a trait.
Complementation assay using the example of
wingless phenotype in Drosophila is shown in the
image. Similar complementation tests in phages
led to the concept of the cistron. A cistron is a
genomic region within which complementation
does not occur, i.e., in a gene.
Pleiotropy (polypheny)
This is the effect of a single gene on
multiple traits. An example is the
pleiotropic effect of the sickle cell
allele.
Non-Mendelian inheritance
These are modes of inheritance not
obeying Mendel´s laws and the other
classical laws of inheritance.
40
• Extrachromosomal inheritance: Inheritance by genes in plastids and mitochondria. These
organelles have their own genomes (endosymbionts). Plastids and mitochondria are
primarily transmitted via the mother. Therefore, the law of reciprocity is not obeyed
• Gene conversion: Deviation from the 1:1 transmission ratio of the 2 parental alleles to
gametes, due to a particular mode of meiotic recombination
• Segregation distortion: Deviation from the 1:1 transmission ratio of the 2 parental alleles to
gametes, by selfish genes, such as B-chromosomes, meiotic drive genes, sister killers, …
• Horizontal gene transfer: Transmission of traits to individuals other than progeny
• Epigenetically determined traits: Inheritance of states of gene activation, e.g., genomic
imprinting, paramutations
Extrachromosomal inheritance
Brindled leaf patterns are encoded by a plastid gene. Plastid inheritance is
exclusively maternal.
In humans, the mitochondrial genome consists of 37 genes. Mitochondria are
transmitted exclusively by the mother. Due to the importance of fatty acid
oxidation, citrate cycle and respiratory chain in
mitochondria, cells suffer from energy deficits. In
particular, tissues with high energy demand
(CNAS, heart, skeletal muscles) are affected.
Gene conservation
Meiotic recombinatoin can result in a crossover or a noncrossover. The crossover is a reciprocal exchange of chromatids.
A non-crossover is a non-reciprocal exchange (conversion). If a
non-crossover occurs at a gene locus, it causes an allele ratio of
3:1 in the products of meiosis. This is called a gene conversion.
Segreation distortion (meiotic drive)
This is the accumulation of selfish genetic elements. Selfisch
genetic elements are genes or chromosomes that do not benefit
the organism, but accumulate in progeny, nevertheless. This is
possible because they alter meiotic segregation in their own
interest (e.g., B-chromosomes (B-chromosomes occur in some individuals of many species in addition
to the standard chromosome set. They do not carry essential genes)) or eliminate their sibling
meiotic products (sister killer alleles). They violate the random Mendelian assortment of alleles to
the progeny. Selfish chromosomes or genes manage to enter the egg cell (as opposed to the polar
body) more often than random in female meiosis, or to enter the generative (as opposed to the
vegetative) nucleus during pollen development. As a consequence, they enter >50% of the progeny
and violate the random Mendelian segregation of alleles. Sister killer alleles can eliminate sibling
spores or pollen carrying the wild-type
allele, by producing a toxic gene product
during male meiosis.
41
Horizontal gene transfer
In Mendelian inheritance, genes are
transmitted from 1 generation
to the next, in the course of
sexual reproduction. In
horizontal gene transfer,
transmission occurs
irrespective of kinship.
Epigenetic inheritance
This is the change of the
epigenome. Chemical
modifications that cause
changes in the function of
genes (in particular the state
of activity) but are not due to changes
in the base sequence of DNA, can be
heritable. These modifications may be
due to DNA-methylation or histone
changes. They are observable as
phenotypic but not genotypic (DNAsequences) change. Examples of
epigenetic inheritance are epimutation,
genomic imprinting (a.k.a. parental
imprinting) in mammals and paramutation (i.e., the mutual influencing of the activity of alleles).
Genomic imprinting
Genes being subject to genomic imprinting are or are not
expressed depending on their parental origin. Therefore 1
of the 2 parental alleles is active, whereas the other is
inactive (monoallelic expression). Imprinting is mainly
found in mammals. Of the around 21.000 known human
genes, around 100-150 are subject to paternal or maternal
imprinting (a well-known example is the Prader-Willi –
Angelman-Locus). Imprinting violates the law of
reciprocity. It is due to epigenetic modifications of DNA
(mainly methylation). Parental imprints are erased in early
germ cells and then restored in a sex-specific pattern.
The Prader-Willi Syndrome
The Prader-Willi phenotype is a retarded mental
development, weakened tonicity*, chronical
hungry feeling and resulting adiposity,
hypogonadism. Only the Prader-Willi allele
inherited from the father is active. A defective version of the gene is received from the mother, the
expression of the syndrome is recessive, since the maternal allele is not active, anyway (therefore it
does not matter whether it is intact or defective). The Prader-Willi syndrome is a consequence of the
loss of region 15q11-13 on the long arm of chromosome #15. This region contains the exclusively
paternally expressed genes SNRPN and NDN. Next to them located is the maternally expressed gene
UBE3A. A defective allele of this gene inherited from the mother causes the Angelman syndrome.
42
Paramutation
An interaction between the 2 alleles of a gene, which leads to the heritable change (mostly
inactivation) of 1 allele by the influence of the other. This change is not dependent on base sequence
but is a chromatin modification at this locus and causes the suppression of gene expression. An
example is the kit paramutation in mice.
43
Genetics 6
Regulation of gene expression
Not all genes are always expressed at constant levels. The regulation of gene expression directs the
production of RNA transcripts in a way that the right amount of RNA is produced at the right time in
the right cells. This is crucial for proper cellular functions and enables responses to cell cycle states,
environmental cues, stress, and developmental progression. In higher eukaryotes, a specific gene
expression pattern is characteristic for a specific cell identity. A number of control mechanisms exist
to regulate gene expression.
Regulation of transcription
There is a regulation of the promoter activity. These are the regulation of the activity of the
transcription machinery and chromatin accessibility/epigenetic mechanisms.
Posttranscriptional regulation
The modification of RNA transcripts that can modulate e.g., translation efficiency or RNA stability.
Specific mechanisms that result in longer or shorter mRNA half live of in differential mRNA stability.
Transcriptional regulation in prokaryotes
In prokaryotes transcription and translation are co-regulated, unlike in eukaryotes (separation of the
nucleus-transcription, cytosol translation). Groups of genes in prokaryotes are often co-regulated in
operons. Operons contain a single promoter and operator sequence and the group of genes they
control. Often, multiple genes are encoded on a single polycistronic* mRNA are separated only by
start and stop codons. These proteins are together required for a specific molecular process. There
are 2 manners of transcriptional regulation. Positive regulation is the activation of transcription
induced upon a specific signal. In all other times transcription is constitutively repressed (e.g., lacoperon). The 2nd is negative regulation. There the inactivation of transcription are once sufficient
levels protein have been produced (e.g.,
tryptophane [trp]-operon).
The lac-operon
The genes encoded by the lac-operon enable
E. coli to process lactose instead of glucose as
an energy source. Together they convert the
disaccharide lactose to glucose and galactose.
Lactose metabolism in E. coli is regulated by
an inducible gene expression system
44
The function of the lac-operon was genetically confirmed by
mutation analysis.
A further layer of regulation: Catabolite-repression of the lacoperon
If both lactose and glucose (or saccharose) are present in
sufficient amounts, then the presence of glucose represses
the expression from the lac-operon to avoid wasteful usage
of cellular resources. The catabolite-activating protein (CAP)
is a positive regulator of the lac-operon and
activated by interaction with the 2nd messenger
cAMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate). The
presence of glucose leads to low levels of cAMP
(starving signal).
A repressible gene expression system: The
trypthophan in E. coli
The trp-operon inhibits synthesis of tryptophane
operon genes if sufficient amounts of trp are
available. This is a self-limiting expression
system. A repressor inactivates/reduces gene expression
and a co-repressor requires a repressor for function. It
enables or enhances the function of the repressor.
Posttranscriptional regulation
Gene regulation can occur after transcription by interaction of specific molecules with specific
regions on the transcript. This can e.g., change the secondary structure of the RNA, establish covalent
modifications of RNA, or change the stability of the RNA molecule. This can increase or decrease the
efficiency of transcription. In bacteria, 2 principal manners of controlling transcription/translation by
modifying the secondary structure of RNA are known. These are attenuation (reduction of gene
expression levels) and riboswitches. Attenuation is the reduction of transcription through an
attenuator sequence. It is a feature of operons responsible for amino acid synthesis (e.g., trp
operon). A riboswitch is a conformation change in the secondary structure of the 5’ UTR or mRNA.
After transcription secondary structures form, that can be recognized by ligands. This leads to
modulation of transcription or translation. In e.g., B. subtilis 5% of genes are controlled by
riboswitches.
A reminder: In bacteria transcription and translation occur simultaneously.
45
Attenuation at the trp operon – an additional layer of control of the trp operon activity
Riboswitches
The ligand binding site is called “aptamer”. They
are similar to attenuation secondary structure is
changed, but regulation occurs through specific
ligand-aptamer interaction (?). Riboswitches can
be controlled by a large number of ligands, e.g.,
amino acids, vitamins, sugars, metal ions, … .
Regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes
Eukaryotic gene regulation establishes cellular heterogeneity and diversity
In multicellular organisms, most cells contain the identical genome information (DNA). Diversity is
established by specific regulations of gene expression. The rule of thumb states that in most cells
approximately half of the available genes are expressed. The combination of expressed genes and
their relative expression level define the cell identity.
Features of gene expression regulation in eukaryotes
Key differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic gene expression are:
• Much larger genome size and complexity
• DNA is combined with histones and other proteins to form chromatin
• Histones can be modified. Complex histone code influences local chromatin activity and
accessibility
• Spatial separation of transcription and
translation (genes on numerous
chromosomes are enclosed in a double
membrane nucleus)
• Processing of transcripts – splicing, capping
polyadenylation
• Transport to cytoplasm/export from nucleus
• Less use of polycistronic transcripts
• In prokaryotes transcription on-states are
the norm – regulation is achieved by specific
reduction of transcription
Multiple levels of transcriptional regulation can be used to control gene expression in eukaryotes
• Chromatin remodelling and regulatory histone modifications
• Splicing and RNA processing
• Regulation of RNA export from nucleus to cytoplasm
• mRNA stability/degradation (mRNAs have a wide range of half-lives (t1/2))
46
• Control of translation rates
• Posttranslational modifications of proteins and differential regulation
of protein stability
Changes in the nucleosome composition alter accessibility of DNA
Nucleosomes consist of approximately 146bp of DNA wrapped around a
histone octamer composed of pairs of each of the 4 core histones (H2A, H2B,
H3 and H4). Histones normally contain histone H2A. Variant histones (e.g.,
H2A.Z) affect the nucleosome mobility and positioning on DNA. Nucleosome
position can repress or activate transcription by gating accessibility of the
promoter sequence.
Chromatin remodelling
This involves repositioning or removal of nucleosomes on DNA.
Chromatin remodelling requires energy in form of ATP. Repositioned
nucleosomes make chromosome regions accessible to transcription
regulatory proteins, transcription activators, RNA Pol II (RNAP II).
SWI/SNF is one of the best studied remodelling complexes. It loosens
the attachment between histone and DNA and causes reorganization
of internal nucleosome components.
Histone modifications
Covalent bonding of functional groups onto N-terminal trails of
histone proteins. This is most common on acetyl, methyl, and
phosphate. Acetylation decreases positive charge, which reduces
affinity of histones to (negatively charged) DNA → weaklier bond
DNA is better accessible to transcription factors and RNAP II (that
is why histones also must be negatively charged). Histone
acetylation of nucleosomes is catalysed by histone
acetyltransferase enzymes (HATs). They are associated with
increased transcription. Histone acetylation is reversed by histone
deacetylases (HDACs). Trimethylation of lysins 27 at histone H3
(H3K27me3) established by polycomb proteins is one of the best studies of epigenetic marks
associated with transcriptional silencing.
DNA methylation
DNA methylation occurs most often on the cytosine of CG doublets in DNA (“methyl CpG”). This is
also called CpG methylation. CpG methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing. The
majority (~80% of CpG di-nucleotides are methylated in mammals). Only at so called CpG islands the
methylation rate is much lower. They are often found in promoters, and they are at least ~500bp in
length. They have a CG content of over 50%. The average CG content genome-wide in humans is
42%.
Eukaryotic transcription initiation requires specific cis-acting sites
A cis-acting sequence is located on the same chromosome as the gene that it regulates. It is required
for accurate regulated transcription of gene, e.g., promoters, enhancers, silencers.
Promoters
Promoters are nucleotide sequences that serve as recognition sites for the transcription machinery.
They are located immediately adjacent to regulatory genes and are critical for transcription initiation.
A core promoter determines the accurate initiation of transcription, and they are upstream of the
47
genes they promote. Proximal-promoter elements modulate efficiency of basal* levels of
transcription.
Enhancers, silencers and insulators
Enhancers are located on either side of the gene, some distance from the gene (potentially 100s of
kb or maybe Mb away) or even within the gene. They regulate the transcription of regulatory
elements and are important for reaching the maximum level of transcription and for the cell type
specific gene expression. Insulators are found between an enhancer and a promoter for a nontarget
gene. They allow some enhancer-promoter interactions and block others. Silencers are cis-acting
transcription regulatory elements. They repress the level of transcription initiation.
Promoter diversity
Great diversity exists in eukaryotic promoters, in structure and
function. Focused promoters have a specific transcription initiation at
the start site and are the major type of initiation for lower eukaryotes.
Dispersed promoters direct initiation from several weak transcriptional
start sites.
Eukaryotic core promoter structure
Proximal-promoter elements
Promoters contain proximal-promoter
elements. They are located upstream of
TATA and BRE motifs and enhance levels
of basal transcription. Examples are CAAT
and GC boxes. Mutations in these
sequences have a major impact on
transcription levels.
Transcriptional regulation and cell type specificity of gene
expression are controlled by enhancers
Enhancers are short genomic elements (~100-1000bp). The 1st one
identified was a 70bp element from simian virus 40 (SV40).
Enhancers are defined by a specific chromatin profile and by binding
of mediator proteins. In the model: Looping brings enhancers and
promoters in contact. This stabilises an active transcription initiation
complex.
48
Enhancer activity directs specificity of gene expression
Eukaryotic transcription initiation is regulated by transcription factors that bind to cisacting sites
Transcription factors (TFs)
They transcribe regulatory proteins and target cis-acting sites of genes regulating expression.
Activators increase transcription initiation and repressors decrease transcription initiation. Multiple
transcription factors bind to several different enhancers and promoter elements and fine-tune the
level of transcription initiation.
Functional domains of TFs
Transcription factors (proteins) have 2 key functional domains (clusters of amino acids with a specific
function). These are the DNA-binding domain (binds to specific DNA sequences in the cis-acting
regulatory site) and the trans-activating domain (activates or represses transcription by binding to
other transcription factors or RNA polymerase).
Key transcription factor protein domains
Characteristic domains of DNA-binding proteins are the helix-turn-helix (HTH) which is present in
both eukaryotic and prokaryotic transcription factors, the zinc-finger which is found in a wide range
of transcription factors that regulate gene expression. They specifically bind to DNA. Each zinc-finger
recognizes 3 specific bps. Combinations of multiple zinc-finger domains can encode a high degree of
specificity. The basic leucine zipper (bZIP) allows for protein-protein dimerization.
Example: regulation of the human MTIIA gene
hMTIIA is a protein that binds to heavy metals
and protects cells from toxic effects and
oxidative stress. It is expressed in low levels in
all cells and transcribed at high levels when
exposed to heavy metals. An example of how a gene can be transcriptionally regulated due to
interplay of promoters, enhancer elements and transcription factors that bind to them. Promoter
and enhancer regions contain multiple cis-acting regulatory sites. Transcription factors controlling
both basal and induced levels of MT2A transcription are indicated below the gene, with arrows
pointing to their binding sites.
Activators and repressors interact with general transcription factors and affect chromatin
structure
Assembly of the Pol II transcription initiation complex
General transcription factors (GTF) are proteins that are required at promoters to initiate basal or
enhanced levels of transcription. The assembly of proteins in specific order forms the pre-initiation
49
complex (PIC). PIC provides a platform for RNA Pol II to recognize
transcription start sites. GTFs that assist RNAP II at a core promoter are
TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIID, TFIIE, TFIIF, TFIIH and a large multi-subunit complex
called mediator. TFIID is a general transcription factor that assists RNA Pol II
at the core promoter. The 1st step in forming PIC is the binding of TFIID to
the TATA box via the TATA binding protein (TBP).
Coactivators and enhanceosome
In the model DNA looping delivers activators,
repressors, and general transcription factors
to promoter vicinity*. Coactivators interact
with activator proteins and enable activators
to make contact with promoter bound
factors. Coactivators form the “enhanceosome”. Enhanceosomes interact
with the transcription complex. Repressor proteins at silencer elements decrease the rate of PIC
assembly and RNA Pol II release.
ENCODE data are transforming our concepts of eukaryotic gene regulation
ENCODE stands for Encyclopaedia of DNA elements project. The goal is to identify all functional DNA
sequences and determine how elements regulate expression. One key discovery by ENCODE is that
more than 80% of the human genome contains potential regulatory elements (once considered “junk
DNA”) (?).
Posttranscriptional regulation
Posttranscriptional regulation plays an equal, if not more significant role compared to transcriptional
control. It is perhaps the major type of regulation in eukaryotes. Mechanisms of posttranscriptional
gene regulation are the control of alternative splicing, mRNA stability, translation, and RNA silencing.
Types of alternative splicing
Alternative splicing generates different forms of mRNA
from identical pre-mRNA (increases the number of
proteins encoded by a single gene). Expression of 1 gene
gives rise to numerous proteins with similar or different
functions. Different mRNAs and proteins are made from
1 gene and are called isoforms.
Cassette exons
They may be excluded from the mature mRNA by joining
the 3’ end of the upstream exon to the 5’ end of the downstream exon. Skipping of cassette exons is
the most prevalent type of alternative splicing
in animals, accounting for nearly 40% of the
alternative splicing events.
Alternative splice site
Within an exon that may be upstream or
downstream of the normally used site.
Intron retention
Introns are normally noncoding sequences, but
are included in the mature mRNAs and are
translated, producing novel isoforms. They can negatively regualte gene expression at the
posttranscriptional level. Such mRNAs are degraded or are retained in the nucleus.
50
Mutually exclusive exons
They allow for the swapping of protein clusters
encoded by different exons. Splicing is coregulated for a cluster of 2 or more adjacent exons such that inclusion of 1 exon leads to the
exclusion of the others in the same cluster.
Alternative promoters
They have more than 1 site where transcription
may be initiated. They produce pre-mRNAs with
different 5’ exons, which may be alternatively
spliced to downstream exons.
Alternative polyadenylation
This is when spliceforms with different 3’ ends are
produced. When an exon containing a
polyadenlyation signal is skipped, downstream exons are included and a downstream polyadenlytion
signal will be used.
Alternative splicing to produce distinct proteins from the locus
The primary transcript, which is shown in the middle of the diagram, can
be spliced into 2 different mRNAs, both containing the first 3 exons but
differing in their final exons.
Vast number of combinatorial possibilities through alternative splicing
at Drosophila Dscam gene
The Dscam gene encodes a protein that guides axon
growth during development. Each mRNA will contain 1
of the 12 possible exons for exon 4 (red), 1 of the 48
possible exons for exon 6 (blue), 1 of the 33 possible
exons for exon 9 (green), and 1 of the 2 possible exons
for exon 17 (yellow). It can theoretically produce 38.016
different mRNAs/proteins.
Regulation of alternative splicing
Splicing enhancers and splicing silencers are cis-acting sequences that regulate alternative splicing.
SR proteins (contain long stretches of serin (S) and Arginin (R)) bind to splicing enhancers and
activate splicing by recruiting splicosome components. Heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(hnRNPs) are a class of proteins that bind splicing silencers and inhibit splicing.
Sex determination in Drosophila
Sex determination in Drosophila is done by alternative splicing. 3 major
genes in pathway are involved: sex lethal (sxl), transformer (tra) and
doublesex (dsx). The product of sxl gene selects the pathway of sexual
development by controlling splicing.
Spliceopathies lead to human disease
Spliceopathies are mutations that affect the regulation of splicing and
contribure to several genetic disorders. Examples are myotonic
dystrophy and spinomuscular atrophy (SMA).
51
Gene expression is regulated by mRNA stability and degradation
Control of mRNA stability
The steady-state level of mRNA is the amount of mRNA in cells avaiable for translation. It is
determined by the combination of transcription and mRNA degration trades. Half-life (t1/2) is when
mRNA is degraded at some point after synthesis. The lifetime of mRNA varies and is reguated by cell
need.
Pathways of degradation
1. Exoribonuclease enzymes shorten length of poly-A tail called deadenylation-dependent
decay. The binding of the poly-A binding protein to tail stabilizes the mRNA
2. Decamping* enzymes remove 7-methylguanine cap, the mRNA is now unstable
3. The endonuclease cleaves the mRNA internally
Deadenylation-dependent mRNA decay
mRNA surveillance by nonsense-mediated decay
mRNAs with a premature stop codon result from a nonsense
mutation in the gene or be due to an RNA polymerase error during
transcription are degraded. They could encode for a potentially
dangerous toxic protein. NMD, the most thoroughly studied mRNA
surveillance pathway, efficiently eliminates mRNAs with a premature stop codon (they are
degraded). NMD requires a pioneer round of translation to recognize the presence of a premature
termination codon (PTC) by the presence of an exon-junction-complex downstream of the PTC.
Degradation can occur in an endonucleolytic (mRNA cut within), or exonucleolytic (XRN/exosome
mediated manner).
Short and long noncoding RNAs play diverse roles in posttranscriptional regulation
RNA interference
Non-coding RNAs do not encode for a protein (have no meaningful open reading frame) but can
otherwise be processed similar to mRNAs. RNA interference (RNAi) is a sequence
specific posttranscriptional regulation. Short RNA molecules regulate gene
expression in the cytoplasm of plants, animals, and fungi and repress translation
and trigger mRNA degradation. The phenomenon is known as RNA-induced gene
silencing.
Molecular mechanisms of RNA induced gene silencing
siRNA and microRNAs are short, double stranded RNAs. siRNAs arise in cells due
to virus infection – produce double-stranded RNA, which is recognized and
52
cleaved by dicer. It is a viral defence mechanism. microRNAs are noncoding RNAs that negatively
regulate gene expression, mainly by interfering with translation.
Posttranslational modifications regulate protein activity
Regulation of proteins by phosphorylation
Phosphorylation is the most common type of posttranslational modification. Kinases catalyse the
addition of a phosphate group to serine, tyrosine, or
threonine amino acid side chains. Phosphates are
enzymes that remove phosphates. Phosphorylation
usually induces conformational changes and therefore
functional changes in proteins.
Ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation
It targets a protein for degradation by covalently modifying it with ubiquitin. Ubiquitinated proteins
are recognized by the proteasome, a multi-subunit protein complex with
protease (protein cleaving) activity. The proteasome unwinds target
proteins, removes their ubiquitin tags, and breaks the protein into small
peptides about 7-8 amino acids long.
lncRNAs
Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) share many proterties with mRNAs: 5’ caps,
3’ poly-A tails, and splicing of introns. There are 4 classes of lncRNA loci:
• Antisense
• Intronic
• Bidirectional
• Intergenic
Options 1 and 2 generate a potential RNA interference
response by generating RNA duplexes or by interfering
with transcription.
lncRNAs bind to and interact with chromatin-modifying
enzymes in many ways to regulate chromatin structure and
gene expression.
Epigenetics
An epigenetic trait is a stable, mitotically heritable phenotype that results from changes in gene
expression without alteration in the DNA sequence. Epigenetics is the study of the ways in which
these changes alter cell- and tissue-specific patterns of gene expression. The epigenome refers to the
epigenetic state off a cell. It describes the specific modification state of the genome. During its
lifespan, an organism has 1 genome, but this genome can be modified in diverse cell types at
different times to produce many epigenomes.
An organism’s phenotype is determined by the interplay of genome and epigenome. The genome is
identical in most cells of the adult body (exceptions in the blood system and in cancer), whereas the
epigenome is distinct in each cell identity.
Why do you need epigenetics?
Epigenetics has been implicated in progressive
specification of gene expression during development,
allele-specific expression in gene imprinting, and
environment genome interactions during prenatal
development that affect adult phenotypes.
Waddington´s landscape
53
All cells are derived from the totipotent zygote and contain identical genome information.
Throughout life the developmental potency is more and more restricted, largely guided by epigenetic
mechanisms. Epigenetic mechanisms serve as a bookmark or indexing system that indicate which
genes can be activated and which genes need to be repressed.
Consequences of faulty epigenetic regulation
Abnormal regulation of the epigenome leads to human genetic disorders such as Prader-Willi
syndrome, Angelman syndrome, and Beckwith-Weidemann syndrome. The loss or alteration of other
epigenetic states can result in cancer.
Epigenetic modifications to the genome
Epigenetic changes occur through 3 major mechanisms. These are:
• DNA methylation: reversible addition or removal of methyl groups to DNA
• Histone modification and chromatin remodelling: reversible addition or removal of
modifications to (mostly) histone trails. They alter the accessibility of genes for transcription
• Sometimes regulated by noncoding RNAs
DNA methylation
1 of the 3 major epigenetic mechanisms is the reversible modification of DNA by the addition or
removal of methyl groups. In mammals, methylation of the DNA takes place after replication and
during differentiation of adult cells. Methylation involves the addition of a methyl group catalysed by
methyltransferase enzymes. Addition of a methyl group (-CH3) to cytosine on the 5-carbon of the
cytosine nitrogenous base resulting in 5-methylcytosine (5mC). Reaction catalysed by a family of
enzymes called DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). De-novo
methyltransferases are Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b. The maintenance
methyltransferase is Dnmt1.
Methylation occurs on cytosine bases adjacent to guanine, called CpG
dinucleotides, which are clustered in regions called
CpG islands. CpG islands are located in and near
promoter sequences adjacent to genes. CpG
methylation leads to transcriptional inactivity. CpG
islands adjacent to essential genes (often
housekeeping genes) and cell-specific genes are
kept unmethylated and available for transcription.
The bulk of methylated CpG dinucleotides are
found in repetitive DNA sequences located in
heterochromatic regions of the genome including
the centromere. Heterochromatic methylation
maintains chromosome stability by preventing
translocations and other chromosomal
abnormalities.
DNA methylation is crucially involved in X-chromosome inactivation. In
mammalian females, 1 X-chromosome is inactivated by converting them into
heterochromatin (dosage compensation). CpG methylation in euchromatic regions
causes a parent-specific pattern of gene transcription involved in genomic
imprinting.
Histone modifications
Histone modification is an important epigenetic mechanism of gene regulation.
Chromatin is composed of DNA wound around an octamer of histone protein to form nucleosomes.
Amino acids in the N-terminal region of the histones can be covalently modified by acetylation,
methylation, and phosphorylation.
54
Modifications occurs at conserved amino acid sequences in
the N-terminal histone tails, which protrude from the
nucleosome. Chemical modification of histones alters the
structure of chromatin, making genes accessible or
inaccessible for transcription.
Acetylation by histone acetyltransferase (HAT) opens up the
chromatin structure. It makes genes available for
transcription. Removal of acetyl groups by histone
deacetylase (HDAC) closes the configuration. It silences
genes by making them unavailable.
The histone code is the sum of the complex patterns
and interactions of histone modifications that change
chromatin organization and gene expression.
Epigenetic and monoallelic gene expression
Monoallelic expression (MAE) is when only 1 allele is transcribed, while the other allele is
transcriptionally silent. There are 3 major classes of MAE:
1. Parent-of-origin monoallelic expression: imprinting
2. Random monoallelic expression: inactivation of the X-chromosome
3. Random monoallelic expression of autosomal genes
Epigenetics and imprinting
Imprinted genes show expression of only the maternal allele or the
paternal allele. This parent-specific pattern of allele expression is
determined during gamete formation. Differential methylation of CpGrich regions produces allele-specific imprinting and subsequent gene
silencing. Information for parent-of-origin specific expression is
encoded in ICRs (imprinting control regions) by differential CpC
methylation.
The pattern of imprinting in mammals is reprogrammed every
generation. When gamete formation begins in female/male germ
cells, both chromosome sets have their imprints erased and are each
reprogrammed by changing the pattern of methylation to carry a
female/male imprint that is transmitted to the next generation
through the egg/sperm.
Most imprinted genes encode growth factors or other growthregulating genes. Most imprinting disorders have their origin during
foetal growth and development (Prader-Willi syndrome, Angelman
syndrome, and Beckwith-Weidemann syndrome). BWS is a disorder of imprinting caused by
abnormal patterns of DNA methylation resulting in altered patterns of gene expression.
55
Epigenetics and random inactivation of the X-chromosome
Random inactivation of an X-chromosome in cells of female mammals. About half of embryonic cells
randomly inactivate the maternal X-chromosome and the other half inactivate the paternal Xchromosome, effectively silencing almost all the ~1000 genes on whichever X-chromosome is
inactivated. At the blastocyst stage of development (~100 cells) in the epiblast (the tissue that later
develop into all adult cell types) 1 of the 2 X-chromosomes in females gets selected for inactivation.
Once inactivated, the same X-chromosome remains silenced in all cells descended from this
progenitor cell. X-inactivation is triggered by the long
non-coding RNA Xist.
Visible effects of XCI are in the calico cat*. Calico coat
colour can occur in several breeds of house cats.
Females show a specific coat pattern based in random Xchromosome inactivation. On X contains information for
black coat colour, the other for orange. White is the
colour of the undercoat.
Epigenetics and random inactivation of autosomal genes
Random inactivation of monoallelically expressed (MAE) genes are scattered throughout the
genome:
• Expression of both alleles: biallelic expression
• Expression of only the maternal allele
• Expression of only the paternal allele
• Expression of neither allele
56
Genetics 7
Recombinant DNA technology, restriction enzymes, and DNA cloning vectors
Recombinant DNA
Artificial alteration of DNA in order of generating a DNA molecule of choice. It is produced by
artificially joining DNA from different biological sources, not necessarily found together in nature.
Clones are recovered copies of a recombinant DNA molecule. Recombinant DNA technology is used
to e.g., isolate, replicate, and analyse genes.
Restriction enzymes
These are DNA cutting enzymes. They bind to
DNA at a specific recognition sequence
(restriction site) and cleave DNA to produce
restriction fragments. It is produced by
bacteria as a defence mechanism against
bacteriophages. The enzyme cleaves both
strands of DNA and this process is referred as
digestion.
It is a palindrome. The symmetry is exhibited
by recognition sequences. Nucleotide
sequence reads the same on both strands, e.g., “kayak” or “level”. BamHI recognition sequence 5’-
GGATCC-3’ (opposing complementary strand is identical in 5’-3’ orientation 3’-CCTAGG-5’).
Restriction enzymes cut DNA in a characteristic cleavage pattern. Sticky ends (cohesive ends) are
fragments produced with overhangs. Blunt ends are fragments produced with double stranded ends.
DNA ligase
DNA fragments will seal a phosphodiester backbone. It joins
restriction fragments covalently to produce intact DNA
molecules.
Plasmid vectors for cloning
Vectors are the carrier DNA molecules. They are extrachromosomal double-stranded DNA molecules
and can replicate cloned DNA fragments in the host cell. They replicate independently from
chromosomes within bacterial cells (have an origin of replication). Genetically modified bacterial
plasmids were the first vectors developed (?). They have several restriction enzyme sites to allow
insertion of DNA fragments and they carry selectable gene markers to distinguish host cells that have
been taken them up from those that have not (mostly antibiotic resistance genes).
57
Plasmids – multiple cloning sites
Multiple cloning sites are restriction sites for commonly used restriction
enzymes. They allow scientists to clone a range of different fragments using a
range of enzymes. Using 2 different enzymes allows the directional cloning to
determine the orientation of the DNA insert relative to the vector.
Cloning by restriction digest is, when plasmid DNA and DNA to be
cloned are cut with the same compatible restriction enzyme. DNA
restriction fragments from DNA to be cloned are added to linearized
vectors in presence of DNA ligase.
Gibson assembly
This is an efficient way to clone multiple inserts at the same time to
generate complex constructs. It is alternative to restriction enzymebased cloning. Key ingredients and steps are:
• DNA fragments with ~15-20bp complementary (1 vector and
multiple inserts). They are generated by PCR and the vector can
be amplified by PCR or opened up using a restriction enzyme
• Exonuclease
• DNA polymerase
• Ligase
1. Exonuclease chews back 5’ ends to generate single strand
overhangs
2. Fragments anneal via homologies
3. DNA polymerase synthesizes complementary strands and fills gaps
4. DNA ligase seals nicks and restores plasmid integrity
Transformation
Plasmids are introduced into bacteria via transformation. There are 2 main techniques. Heat shock
uses calcium ions and a brief heat shock to pulse DNA into cells. The calcium neutralizes the repelling
negative charges of DNA and the liposaccharide (LPS) cell wall of gram-negative bacteria. The heat
shock generates channels in the cell wall and allows plasmids to enter bacteria. The 2nd technique is
electroporation. A brief, high-intensity pulse of electricity moves plasmid DNA into bacterial cells.
Summary
Plasmid DNA and DNA to be cloned are cut with same or
compatible restriction enzymes. DNA restriction fragments from
DNA to be cloned are added to linearized vector in presence of
DNA ligase. Gibson assembly can be used as an efficient alternative
to establish complex DNA constructs. Recombinant DNA is
produced and introduced into bacterial host cells by
transformation.
Blue-white screening
How to identify bacteria that have taken up the
correct plasmid. Selectable marker genes
provide resistance to antibiotics. Only bacteria
that have taken up a plasmid can survive. But
also, bacteria that gave taken up unmodified
vector plasmid that was not properly cut or
could re-ligate can survive. Blue-white selection
58
is used to discriminate cells containing recombinant and nonrecombinant DNA.
Plasmid contains lacZ gene, which encodes β-galactosidase.
A recap: lactose metabolism in E. coli is regulated by an inducible gene expression
system.
The blue-white screening mechanism works with agar plates containing X-gal. This
is analogous of lactose and a substrate for the β-galactosidase. When the X-gal is
cleaved by enzyme it turns blue. Bacterial cells with functional lacZ gene carrying a
nonrecombinant plasmids are blue. Bacterial cells with recombinant plasmids are
white. If the lacZ is active, the bacteria will turn blue.
Alternative vector systems
Phage vector systems are among the earliest vectors
used in addition to plasmids. They include a
genetically modified stran of the bacteriophage l (λ).
Central third of lambda (λ) phage vectors can be
replaced with foreign DNA without affecting the
ability to infect cells and replicate. They can carry up
to 45kb of cloned DNA payload.
Bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) and yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) are vectors used to
clone large fragments of DNA. BACs are generally very large but have a low copy number (1-2
copies/bacterial cell) of plasmids. YACs have telomeres at each end, ORI and centromere.
Expression vectors
They are designed to ensure mRNA expression of a cloned
gene (to produce large quantities of encoded protein in a
host cell). Plasmids, phage vectors, and YACs only carry
DNA and do not necessarily produce a corresponding (?).
Expression vectors are available for both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic host cells and contain a promoter upstream of the clone’s transgene to drive expression.
In this case the orientation of the insertion is crucial. It also allows the generation of fusion proteins
(important to also maintain the reading frame).
DNA libraries are collections of cloned sequences
DNA libraries represent a collection of cloned DNA. There are 2 main types: genomic and
complementary (cDNA) libraries. A genomic library contains at least 1 copy of all sequences in a
genome of interest. It is constructed by cutting genomic DNA with restriction enzymes and ligating
fragments into vectors. Complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries contain complementary DNA copies
made from mRNAs present in the cell population. Represents genes active transcriptionally at the
time cells were collected for mRNA isolation.
cDNA library
cDNA libraries are constructed by isolating mRNA from cells, synthesizing
complementary DNA (cDNA) using revere transcriptases, e.g., for cloning
cDNA molecules into a vector.
1. oligodT primer anneals to poly-A tail
2. retroviral reverse transcriptase synthesizes cDNA from RNA
template
3. generates an mRNA-DNA double stranded hybrid molecule
4. single stranded cDNA can be used directly as template for PCR
59
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a powerful technique for copying and exponentially
amplifying DNA
PCR
PCR is a rapid method of DNA cloning that eliminates the need to use host cells for cloning. It copies
specific DNA sequence via in vitro reactions, it can amplify target DNA sequences present in very
small quantities.
PCR requires 2 primers. Primers are short, single-stranded sequences, 1 complementary to 5’ end
and another complementary to 3’ end. dsDNA to be clones is put in a tube with DNA polymerase,
Mg2+, and dNTPs. Primers anneal to denatured DNA (?). complementary strands are synthesized by
heat-stable DNA polymerase.
3 key steps for PCR
Denaturation generates single strands from
double strand DNA (95°C), primer annealing
(hybridization/annealing; ~55°C), and extension
(~72°C). The steps are repeated multiple times
using a thermocycler to amplify DNA
exponentially. New strands along with old
strands serve as templates in the next cycle. The
DNA strand is doubled in each cycle: 1(copy) →
2 → 4 → 8 → 16 → 32. About 1 billion molecules
are generated form a single molecule of DNA
after 30 cycles.
Limitation of PCR
Some information about nucleotide sequence of target DNA is required to synthesize primers. Minor
contamination from other sources can cause problems, e.g., skin cells from the researcher, or a
carryover from a previous experiment. PCR cannot well amplify long DNA fragments (up to 2kb easy,
up to 30kb impossible).
Applications for PCR
It is a useful tool, probably the most widely used technique in genetics and molecular biology. It is a
workhorse tool for molecular biologists. It allows for screening of mutations involved in genetic
disorders. The location and nature of mutations can be determined quickly. The ends of DNA
fragments can be modified by extending primers,
e.g., restriction sites and tags can be introduced.
Different flavours of PCR
Reverse transcriptions PCR (RT-PCR) is a methodology* for studying gene expression (mRNA
production by cells or tissues). Reverse transcriptase is used to generate cDNA. cDNA can be used
further as a template in PCR, no dsDNA has to be generated before starting PCR as this will be done
in the 1st round of amplification anyways. Quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) allows us to quantify
amplification reactions as they occur in real time. The
amount of dsDNA present in the PCR reactions is
measured after each cycle of amplification using a DNA
strain such as SYBR green. RT PRC can be combined with
qPCR to quantitatively assess transcription levels by
inferring the amount of RNA initially present (RT-qPCR).
It is used in Covid19 PCR tests.
60
RT PCR and qPCR – Taqman
The Taqman approach to quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) involves a pair
of PCR primers along with a probe sequence complementary to the target
gene. 1 additional component is used compared to SYBR green based
approach. It is more expensive but more accurate. The probe contains a
reporter dye (R) at one end and a quencher dye (Q) at the other end. While
the quencher dye is close to the reporter dye, it interferes with
fluorescence released by the reporter dye. When Taq DNA polymerase
extends a primer to synthesize a strand of DNA, it cleaves the reporter dye
off, of the probe allowing the reporter to give off energy. Each subsequent
PCR cycle releases more reporter dyes, which can be directly measured
after each cycle.
Gene synthesis: alternative to generating DNA fragments by restriction
subcloning or PCR
Now, synthetic DNA with a sequence of choice can be purchased commercially. In silico design of
fragment (length up to ~10kb possible) (?). It is synthesized and cloned into a vector of choice. It
costs currently ~9c per bp → 450€ for a 5kb gene.
Molecular techniques for analysing DNA and RNA
Restriction mapping
Restriction maps establish a number of, order of, and distances between restriction enzyme cleavage
sites on cloned segments of DNA. It provides information on the presence and length of cloned insert
and location of restriction sites within a clone (?).
They are created by cutting DNA with different restriction enzymes and separating DNA fragments by
gel electrophoresis, which separates fragments by size. The smallest fragments move the farthest
down the gel. Fragments are visualized on the gel by staining it with ethidium bromide (or other
dyes) and illuminated by UV (or blue) light.
Section 20.4 nucleic acid blotting
Southern blot
The southern blot can be used to identify a specific DNA
fragment in a complex mixture of DNA molecules, e.g.,
genomic DNA enzymatically digested, and you want to see
the fragment length of a specific locus. Methodology is the
hybridization between complementary nuclei acid (DNA or
RNA) molecules. It uses a radioactively or enzymatically
labelled DNA probe. The southern blot determines whether
a clone contains all or part of a gene. It ascertains* the size
and sequence organization of a gene or a DNA sequence of
interest. 3 key steps are separation of DNA fragments by gel
electrophoresis, transfer of size separated DNA fragments to
a positively charged membrane and hybridization by using
labelled probes. Specific bands
can be detected using e.g., film or
more modern methods of
detection.
61
DNA or RNA FISH
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
involves hybridizing a probe directly to a chromosome or RNA. It is carried out with isolated
chromosomes on slide or in situ in tissue sections or entire organisms. It is helpful when embryos are
used for various studies in developmental genetics – it tells you which cells and tissues a certain gene
of interest is expressed in what amounts.
DNA sequencing
Sanger sequencing
Dideoxynucleotide chain-termination sequencing (Sanger sequencing) is still the most common
method of DNA sequencing. Yet it is outdated and slowly replaced by more modern techniques, but
still a powerful item in the molecular
biologist´s toolkit. Dideoxynucleotide is a
deoxynucleotide with a hydrogen at the
3’ instead of an OH. Dideoxynucleotide
causes DNA synthesis to terminate.
62
Genetics 8
Genetic engineering
This is the science of manipulating genetic material of an organism. Why would you want to modify
genomes? This is used in biotechnology, generation of genetic disease models and the repair of
defective genes. The first artificial genetic modification was accomplished using biotechnology was
transgenesis. Transgenesis is the process of transferring genes from 1 organism to another and was
1
st accomplished by Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen in 1973. Bacteria were forced to replicate a
gene of interest (GOI) encoded on a plasmid. This worked even between different bacterial species.
Important advances to make this possible included the discovery of restriction enzymes and DNA
ligases, the ability to design plasmids, and technologies such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
Sanger sequencing. In 1974 Rudolf Jaenisch generated the 1st
transgenic animal. He injected mouse
pre-implantation embryos with simian virus 40 (SV40) viral DNA, which were born and carried viral
DNA. In 1983 an antibiotic resistant gene was inserted into tobacco, resulting in the 1st genetically
engineered plant.
Genome engineering
1 drawback of transgenesis based genetic engineering technology is the random nature with which
the DNA is inserted in the hosts genome. This can alter or impair other genes within the organism
(e.g., the transgene can integrate into an endogenous gene or alter its regulatory sequences).
Genome editing, or genome engineering is a type of genetic engineering in which DNA is inserted,
deleted, modified, or replaced in the genome of a living organism. Genome editing targets the
insertions to site specific locations.
Gene targeting and knockout animal models
Gene targeting is the manipulation of a specific allele, locus, or base sequence to learn its function
(manipulates a specific gene in a genome). A gene knockout is the disruption or elimination of
specific genes to study the resulting phenotype (effect of a certain genetic setup or genotype).
Knockout yeast strains and KO mice have revolutionized research. Gene knockin is the modification
of an endogenous locus, e.g., to express a fusion protein of green fluorescent protein and a gene of
your interest. Transgenic animals express or overexpress a particular gene of interest (transgene).
They carry a knockout or knockin mutation and this allows for the study of a phenotype of a certain
mutation in vivo.
Generating genetic mouse models using transgenesis in mouse embryonic stem cells
GFP and friends
Various naturally occurring and artificial fluorescent proteins can be used to be fused with target
proteins. Some examples are the blue fluorescent protein (BFP), yellow fluorescent protein (YFP),
Kusabira orange (mKO2), red fluorescent protein (RFP), dsRed, mCherry, … . In 2008 Osamu
Shimomura, Marty Chalfie and Roger Tsien were awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for the
discovery and development of the green fluorescent protein (GFP). GFP was discovered in the
jellyfish Aequorea Victoria. There a protein named aequorin produces blue light which GFP converts
into the green light emitted by the jellyfish´s photo organs. The visibility under standard condition is
63
extremely rare, most other organisms have fluorescent proteins that are only visible if they are
illuminated by external light sources.
Gene tagging
Gene fusion generates a single gene from 2
independent ORFs (open reading frame) by in
frame fusion. This fusion gene generates a
fusion protein. This method is often used for
gene-tagging and useful for making genes
detectable or visible. Frequently used tags are
GFP (green fluorescent protein) for the visualization of a protein localization or as an expression
reporter or e.g., hemagglutinin (HA) or flag tags for protein purification and protein-interactome
studies. HA and flag are short protein sequences against which good antibodies have been
developed.
Genome engineering technologies
Gene targeting by homologous recombination
Early methods to target genes to certain sites within a genome of an organism (called gene targeting)
relied on homologous recombination (HR). By creating DNA constructs that
contains a template that matches the targeted genome sequence it is
possible that the HR processes within the cell will insert the construct at the
desired location. Using this method on embryonic stem cells led to the
development of transgenic mice with targeted genes knocked out. It has also
been possible to knock in genes or alter gene expression patterns. In
recognition of their discovery of how homologous recombination can be
used to introduce genetic modifications in mice through embryonic stem
cells, Mario Capecchi, Martin Evans and Oliver Smithies were awarded the
2007 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.
Conditional gene targeting
If a vital gene is knocked out it can prove lethal to the organism. In order to
study the function of these genes site specific recombinases (SSR) can be
used. The two most common types are the Cre-LoxP and Flp-FRT systems.
Cre recombinase is an enzyme that removes DNA by homologous
recombination between binding sequences known as Lox-P sites. The FlipFRT system operates in a similar way, with the Flip recombinase recognizing
FRT sequences. By crossing an organism containing the recombinase sites
flanking the gene of interest with an organism that express the SSR under
control of tissue specific promoters, it is possible to knock out or switch on
genes only in certain cells. These techniques were also used to remove marker genes from transgenic
animals. Further modifications of these systems allowed researchers to induce recombination only
under certain conditions, allowing genes to be knocked out or
expressed at desired times or stages of development.
Inducible genetics using the Cre-Lox system
Conditional KO allows a scientist to control when a target gene is
disrupted (a particular time in development or a particular cell type). At
the Cre-Lox system, the Cre (cyclization recombination) recombinase
derives from the P1 phage and recombines specific loxP sequences. If
loxP sites face in the same orientation, Cre recombinase will remove all
sequence between them. Otherwise, there will be an
64
inversion. Promoters for Cre can be designed in a tissue specific manner.
How to get your transgenes to the right locus? Targeting vectors
How to bring DNA into higher eukaryotic cells
Methods are:
• Lipid nanoparticles – lipid packed DNA
• Electroporation
• Direct microinjection of DNA and/or other proteins into embryos
• Viral vectors – commonly used are retroviral, lentiviral, or adenoviral vectors
• Biolistic (bio + ballistic) transfection – gene gun, DNA coated gold particles are shot at high
speed into cells
Genome editing technologies exploit endogenous DNA repair
machinery
NHEJ vs. HDR
In most eukaryotic cells, the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)
pathway is dominant. It generates insertions and deletions during
double-stranded break (DSB) repair. The presence of a DNA
template with homology to the sequences flanking the DSB
location, homology-directed repair (HDR) can seal the DSB in an
error-free manner. In most cells, both of these repair pathways
are active, however the HDR pathway is generally less efficient
than the NHEJ pathway and requires a homologous template. This
template is naturally present as sister chromatin in late S-phase
and G2-phase and may be added artificially as donor DNA. In late
S and G2-phase HDR is relatively more active.
History of genome engineering technologies
65
The 1st step in programmable genome engineering – creating DNA breaks at defined target loci
Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) are used
for that. They are proteins and consist of a 34aa repeat modules.
Each repeat recognizes a single DNA base pair. DNA recognition
occurs via 2 hypervariable amino acid residues (repeat-variable
di-residue, RVD) at positions 12 and 13 within each repeat. TAL
effector repeats can be assembled in a modular fashion, varying
the RVDs to create a TAL protein that recognizes a specific target
DNA sequence. To achieve cutting, the bacterial type IIS
restriction endonuclease Fok1, is fused to the DNA binding
repeats. Once the protein is bound to duplex* DNA via its DNAbinding domain the DNA cleavage domain is activated and
cleaved DNA. Although very elegant, using TALENs is very time
consuming and complex. Not all work as expected.
CRISPR – Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
CRISPR was a game changer for genome engineering. It is a fast, cheap, and extremely efficient tool
for programmable genome engineering.
A bacterial immune system can be used for mammalian genome engineering
Many bacteria and most archaea have evolved RNA
guided adaptive immune systems against phages.
These are encoded in clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) loci and CRISPR
associated (Cas) genes. DNA of invading phages is
incorporated into the CRISPR repeat spacer array as a
new spacer. This keeps a record of previous infections
to prevent repeated infections (“immunity”). Key
components of the CRISPR system are a tracer RNA,
Cas9 nuclease, and a CRISPR array. CRISPR RNAs
(crRNAs) transcription produces an RNA containing the
spacer and a short sequence of the CRISPR repeat.
Tracer, crRNA, and Cas9 protein form a complex.
Complexes can pair with a protospacer (DNA complementary to spacer sequence) in phage DNA and
induce double strand breaks by Cas9 endonuclease activity. How is the cleavage of the CRISPR array
inhibited? Protospacer have to be followed by a PAM (5’-NGG-3’ in case of Cas9) sequence.
The components of the CRISPR system
CRISPR and tracer RNA
CRISPR RNA (crRNA) provides specificity and targets Cas9 cleavage activity to
specified loci. It was a breakthrough by generating a chimeric RNA between
crRNA and tracer by Emmanuelle Charpentier’s and Jennifer Doudna’s groups
This makes CRISPR/Cas9 a simple to use 2 component system The chimeric
transcript is termed single guide RNA (sgRNA) or just “guide RNA” (gRNA)
Further breakthrough by Feng Zhang’s group showed that CRISPR/Cas can be
used in mammals for genome engineering This opened the possibility of one
day using CRISPR in the clinic to repair deleterious mutations in the soma or in
the germline. At the same time it raises ethical questions. How far can one go?
Who determines what is a justified modulation of the germ line?
66
R loop formation
crRNA/tracer hybrid invades dsDNA and forms a so-called R-loop. R-loops are
nucleic acid structures consisting of 2 DNA strands plus 1 complementary RNA
strand.
Cas9-protein
Cas9 is a nuclease. It consists of 2 halves (lobes) and has 2
nuclease activities: HNH domain and RuvC domain. Each
performs a single strand cut, together they make a double ………
strand break. PAM is the interacting domain (PI).
How do sgRNAs/Cas9 find their targets in the genome?
The Cas9-sgRNA RNP needs to find its target in the complex and crowded environment of the
nucleus. Cas9 programmed with sgRNA finds targets through 3-dimensional collisions between Cas9
and DNA. There is no scanning. Interactions with PAM sites
without interactions between spacer and protospacers is
short lived, nothing happens. But long-lived if spacer finds a
complementary sequence – Cas9 cuts the DNA. Without
the PAM site, even if perfectly complementary protospacer
is available there is no interaction and no cutting. Once
interactions are established, it catalytically activates the 2
nickase domains of the endonuclease to specifically
generate a double-strand break in the target DNA
molecule, exactly 3 nucleotides into the sequence
homologous to the guide.
Using CRISPR/Cas9 in mammalian cells
In mammalian applications, expression of sgRNA from Pol III promoter (e.g., U6 promoter). Pol III
promoters usually drive expression of small nuclear RNAs. U6 promoter drives the expression of U6
small nuclear (sn)RNA, a spliceosomal component. In biotechnology Pol III promoters had been
efficiently used to transcribe microRNAs and interference RNA. They work very well to transcribe
high amounts of sgRNAs. Specificity an efficiency of spacers can be computationally* predicted using
online tools.
If NHEJ is used to repair the CRISPR induced double strand break, so called
indels can occur. Indels are insertions or deletions. If these are out of frame in a
protein coding region, then no functional protein will be produced. If more
complex genome engineering is desired, the HDR pathway needs to be
triggered. Homology doners can be short single stranded DNA oligos (~50-
100nt) or longer plasmids carrying a transgene payload or complex genome
modifications, e.g., GFP tag to generate a reporter construct.
How to deliver sgRNAs and Cas9 into cells? This is done by transfecting* both
components into plasmids, each on individual plasmids or both together on 1.
Cas9 expression is driven by a standard Pol II promoter, e.g., CAG or EF1a. sgRNA expression is driven
by a snRNA promoter (Pol II), e.g., U6. Cells will produce Cas9 protein and sgRNAs and they will form
a complex in the cells. When purifying Cas9 protein and in vitro transcription of sgRNA, the Cas9 and
SgRNA complex is pre-assembled in a test tube und electroporation is used to electroporate the socalled ribonucleoprotein (RNP) partice.
67
CRISPR enabled options for genome editing
Triggering the HDR pathway requires a homology donor
If the homology directed repair pathway should be
triggered, a homology donor needs to be provided. It can
simply be a single stranded short (<100nt) oligo that
carries a mutation of interest and homologies to the
target region. It can also be a plasmid carrying
homologies to the to be target genomic region.
Transfected plasmids should be circular to avoid random
integration. dsDNA breaks to trigger repair are provided
by CRISPR. CRISPR mediated dsDNA breaks occur with high efficiency and NHEJ is the dominant
repair pathway in most cells. Therefore, a proper genome editing by HDR must be carefully validated.
PCR and southern blotting are functional validations.
Multiplex genome editing in ES cells
…and in the germ line in vivo
Mutant versions of Cas9 extend the applicability of CRISPR/Cas9 for genome engineering and
biotechnology purposes
Off target cutting could be problematic. Target sequence binding can tolerate mismatches up to
several nucleotides. There are often thousands of possible binding sites. The exact extend of the offtarget problem is disputed and unclear. The solution are versions of Cas9 that are mutated in either
of the 2 nickase domains (e.g., Cas9-D10A). a single sgRNA/Cas9 complex will produce only a nick. A
68
nick describes a single strand break. Usually, nicks will be repaired
without problems. The trick is to design 2 sgRNAs targeting
neighbouring regions (<1000bp apart). 2 nicks on opposing strands
result in double strand breaks. There is a very low off-target
probability. These double strand breaks will be repaired using NHEJ or
HDR.
Using CRISPR/Cas9 to recruit effector proteins to target loci
RNA guided genome regulation is used. CRISPR-Cas9 can be used to
control genome activity in a reversible manner without causing
double strand breaks. Fusion of Cas9 with effector proteins allows site
specific recruitment. Cas9 needs to be catalytically inactive in these
cases. Both the RuvC and HNH domain are mutated. There is no
nuclease activity. Effectors can be variable and can be transcriptional
activators or repressors or other enzymes.
Some examples are:
• Cas9-p300 or Cas9-VP64: transcriptional activation
• Cas9-Dnmt3a: de novo DNA methylation at a
site of recruitment
• Cas9-Tet1: DNA demethylation at a site of
recruitment
• Cas9-KRAB: KRAB domain is a strong inducer for
epigenetic silencing
69
Genetics 9
Genomics
Genetics vs. genomics
Genetics is a term that refers to the study of genes and their roles in inheritance – in other words,
the way that certain traits or conditions are passed down from one generation to another. Genetics
involves scientific studies of genes and their effects. Genes (units of heredity) carry the instructions
for making proteins, which direct the activities of cells and functions of the body. Examples of genetic
or inherited disorders include cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease, and phenylketonuria (PKU).
Genomics is a more recent term that describes the study of all of a person's genes (the genome),
including interactions of those genes with each other and with the person's environment. Genomics
includes the scientific study of complex diseases such as heart disease, asthma, diabetes, and cancer
because these diseases are typically caused more by a combination of genetic and environmental
factors than by individual genes. Using high-performance computing and math techniques known as
bioinformatics, genomics researchers analyse enormous amounts of DNA sequence data to find
variations that affect health, disease, or drug response. In humans that means searching through
about 3 billion units of DNA across 23.000 genes. Genomics is a much newer field than genetics and
became possible only in the last couple of decades due to technical advances in DNA sequencing and
computational biology.
Different classes of genomics
Genomics is the study of genomes. Structural genomics looks at the structure of genes and genome
organization. Functional genomics looks at the function of genes and their interplay with each other.
Comparative genomics looks at gene relationships between species and within a genome.
Metagenomics looks at the interactions of the environment with genetics and gene functions.
Genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics
A genome is all genetic information present in a single cell of an organism. The genome includes both
the genes (the coding regions) and the noncoding DNA, as well as mitochondrial DNA and chloroplast
DNA. The study of the genome is called genomics. A transcriptome is the set of all RNA transcripts,
including coding and noncoding in an individual or a population of cells. “Transcriptome” is a term
combining the words transcript and genome. The study of the transcriptome is called
transcriptomics. The proteome is the entire set of proteins that is expressed by a genome, cell,
tissue, or organism at a certain time. Proteomics is the study of the proteome.
Aligning contigs* to build a genome
The entire genome cannot be sequenced at once. It has
to be broken into overlapping pieces first. These pieces
are called contigs. Note that in reality, contig alignment
involves fragments that are several thousands of bases in
length.
Whole genome sequencing WGS
Understanding genome functions requires knowledge of the
genome´s composition (DNA sequence):
• Genomic DNA is cut into overlapping fragments (contigs)
• Restriction fragments are ligated into vectors
• Each contig is sequenced
• The entire chromosome is assembled by computer
programmes utilizing contig overlaps
• Fragments are aligned based on overlapping DNA sequences
70
The race for the 1st human genome sequence
Genome sizes of some pro and eukaryotes
Genome sequencing
Definitions
• De novo sequencing: 1st time a specific sequence is obtained “de novo”
• Reference genome: representative sequence, e.g., the reference genome is a consensus of
the genomes of 13 anonymous test subjects. Individual genomes are distinct in many places.
Mouse reference genomes are derived from inbred mouse strains which have much less
genetic variability than individuals in a human population
• Resequencing: sequencing of an individual genome where a reference genome is already
known. Genome assembly is much simpler in this case
• Pan-genome: this describes the complete set of all polymorphisms within a species. It is
estimated that there are over 2*108
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human
genome
Modern ways of DNA sequencing
Classical methods such as Sanger sequencing are still used on a daily basis, but are technologically
obsolete and slowly replaced by more efficient sequencing methods. Next generation sequencing
(NGS) is mainly used commercially, and the most successful method is sequencing by synthesis from
Illumina. NGS requires fragmentation of DNA to be sequenced and an amplification step before
sequencing. Third generation sequencing, such as Nanopore sequencing does not require DNA
amplification prior to sequencing and can sequence long DNA molecules.
71
Sample preparation for Illumina based genome sequencing

RNA sequencing is a next generation sequencing method to obtain
a global overview of the transcription state of a population of cells
RNA sequencing is very similar to genome sequencing. It provides a
quantitative assessment of the amounts of each RNA transcript in
the cell. It can also be used to assess differential expression of
splice variants. As a rule of thumb, it can be assumed that in any
given cell type around 50% of genes are expressed. Combinatorial
gene expression enables a vast amount of phenotypic complexity.
72
Massive parallel singe cell analysis using droplet-based singe cell preparation
Sequencing more than 2mio cells from 61 embryos from 5 developmental stages allows
reconstruction of embryonic organogenesis
Long read sequencing (3rd generation sequencing)
Illumina based NGS methods only produce sequences of ~300bp in length. That is too short for
complex splicing analysis but also for sequencing and mapping repetitive genome regions. The
technology behind it is complex. The technology allows to sequence fragments of an average of 10-
30kb length in a single run. This enables the assembly of complex genomic or transcript structure.
The drawback is that there are higher error rates, and it is slower than Illumina bases sequencing.
NGS analysis relies on bioinformatic applications and
genomic databases
How to identify genes from a DNA sequence
Most of the genome is not protein coding and
does not qualify as genes. Only ~5% of the
genome are protein coding genes. How can
you find them after sequencing a genome? 1
st
look for starches that have the potential to
73
encode for a protein. An ORF usually but not always begins with the
sequence ATG (encodes for methionine) and ends with a stop codon
(TAA, TAG, or TGA). Statistically there is a stop codon every 16 triplets.
ORFs are usually much longer: 370 triplets in E. coli, 483 triplets in yeast,
450 triplets in a human.
2
nd, look for GC vs. AT distribution that is close to 50:50. Genomic
background is rather AT-rich. In genes the ratio is closer to 50:50. 3rd
look for characteristic regulatory sequences, like CpG islands
(eukaryotes), TATA-boxes, transcription initiators, Kozak sequences
(GCCACC) at translation initiation (just before ATG). … . A final
determination of the exon/intron structure and the exact transcription
start site can only be determined by additional experiments such as RNA
sequencing. RNAseq only detects processed spliced transcripts. All
sequence between eons that is not part of the mRNA can be categorized
as intron.
Genome information from many species can be retrieved from nucleotide
repositories
A typical gene bank entry is shown on the right. It shows the source organism,
information about the gene, exons, CDS (protein coding sequence) and the
actual nucleotide sequence. The POU5F1 gene is better known as Oct4 and
encodes for the pluripotency transcription factor OCT4.
Functional genomics establishes gene functions and identifies
regulatory elements in a genome
Functional genomics
This is the study of gene functions. A gene function can be predicted. BLAST (basic local alignment
search tool) searches are used to screen databases and compare a sequence to a known sequence.
The logic is that a genome sequence statistically similar to a gene with known function likely encodes
for a protein with a similar function. An example is comparing portions of the human leptin gene
(LEP) with its homolog in mice (ob/Lep). Experimental
evidence for gene functions are e.g., in KO studies and
are in correlation in RNA sequencing datasets.
Prediction of protein domains helps predicting protein functions
Protein domains and motifs are when a gene sequence is used to predict a polypeptide sequence.
The polypeptide can be analysed for specific protein domains and motifs. Protein domains are ion
channels, membrane-spanning regions, secretion, and export signals. The presence of protein
domains indicates a potential function of the protein. Motifs are helix-turn-helix, leucine zippers, or
74
zinc-finger motifs. Motifs are found in the regulatory region of the DNA. They indicate how
expression of a gene could be controlled. They are not part of the protein coding sequence but are
rather found in promoters or enhancers.
Homologs, paralogs, and orthologs
Homologous genes are genes that are evolutionally related (they share the same evolutionary origin).
Orthologs are homologous genes found in different species. They are thought to have descended
from a common ancestor but have distinct molecular functions. Paralogs are homologous genes in
same species that have the same evolutionary origin but have distinct molecular functions.
ChIP sequencing – a key genomic technique
ChIP is Chromatin immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitation is
the precipitating* of a protein out of solution using an antibody
specific for that particular protein. ChIP precipitated protein –
DNA complexes. It is designed to map protein – DNA
interactions. It is useful for e.g., identifying genes regulated by
DNA binding transcription factors or for determining chromatin
modification states genome wide:
1. Crosslink proteins to chromatin and fragment chromatin
2. Antibody binds to protein (TF or histone mark) of interest
3. Purify antibody – chromatin complex by
immunoprecipitation
4. Reverse crosslinks and purify DNA fragments
5. NGS and map all fragments that were associated with the transcription factor of interest to the
genome
Detailed genome wide information to which regions a TF binds or at which sites certain chromatin
modifications are enriched.
Proteomics
Proteomics is the research of the proteome. The proteome
is the sum of all proteins encoded by the genome of a cell,
tissue, or organism. It is used to reconcile* differences
between the number of genes in the genome and the
number of different proteins produced. It allows e.g., the
comparison of proteins in normal and diseased tissue. It can
be used to define the interaction partners of specific
proteins in co-immunoprecipitation*-based assays.
Genomics, epigenomics and proteomics are often referred
together as “omics” approaches.
Mass spectrometry (MS)
MS is an analytical technique that is used to measure the mass-to-charge ratio of ions. MS identifies
which proteins are present in a complex mixture of proteins, e.g., cell extract or coimmunoprecipitation sample. Protein samples are enzymatically digested. Peptides are ionized and
accelerated through a magnetic field. Flight times and deflections in the field sort peptides according
to their mass/charge ratio. The most likely amino acid composition of the peptide can be calculated
and the relative amount of protein in the sample can be inferred. Or alternatively the amino acid
sequence of an unknown protein can be determined.
75
Genetics 10
Chromosome compaction
The scale of chromosome compaction
End to end, the DNA of the human genome could extend ~2m long. This much DNA needs to fit into a
nucleus that is ~10µm in diameter. This level of compaction would require folding the DNA in half 18
times.
Proteins help compact DNA into chromatin
DNA and proteins in the nucleus form the chromatin. Chromatin contains roughly
1/3 each of DNA, histone proteins and non-histone proteins (NHP). There is also
some RNA.
Histones provide the 1st level of compaction
How much DNA is bound by a histone?
Higher levels of compaction, the 30nm fibre?
Based on in vitro evidence with purified proteins, it was observed that
chromatin can form larger regular structures called 30nm fibres.
Despite years of searching, evidence of these fibres in cells remained
elusive and they are now generally believed not to exist. Instead,
higher levels of compaction are much more irregular, and are based
largely on the DNA sequence and post-translational modification.
Euchromatin vs. heterochromatin
Heterochromatin is more tightly packed, less transcriptionally active, and often localized closer to the
nuclear membrane (dark areas in an EM image). Heterochromatin often contains DAN with many
repeated sequences. Euchromatin is less dense and contains more heavily described genes (lighter
areas in an ER image). Most human genome is euchromatin.
76
Chromatin must be made accessible for transcription
Posttranslational modifications are associated with
heterochromatin, euchromatin, and active transport. Lysines on
the tails of histones are frequently acetylated or methylated. A
single lysine can be methylated up to 3 times.
Even at euchromatic regions, DNA is directly wrapped
around histones is inaccessible. A combination of
histone acetylation and chromatin remodelers help
move the histones around.
SMC proteins help organize DNA in prokaryotes and
eukaryotes
SMC (structural maintenance of chromosomes) proteins can
bring 2 fairly distant regions of DNA together. If these regions
are on the same chromosome, they form a loop.
SMC proteins compact chromatin into chromosomes in
mitosis.
Chromosome compaction is conducted primarily by condensins
There are 2 types of condensins – I and II. Condensin I organizes
the DNA into large loops and then Condensin II compacts the
large loops into smaller loops.
Sister chromatids are held together by cohesin
At the inner centromere, cohesin holds the sister chromatids together until anaphase onset. At
anaphase, an enzyme called separase cleaves the cohesion ring to allow the sisters to separate.
Cohesion compacts chromatin into TADs
Cohesins also play a role in the formation of loops called TADs
(topologically associated domains), which bring transcription enhancers
into the vicinity of the promoter.
SMC protein act through “loop extrusion”
SMC proteins form loops through an active
process that uses ATP to extrude the DNA
through the middle of the complex.
Chromosome organization
The C-value paradox and junk DNA
The C-value is the amount of DNA in the nucleus. It was previously
measured in picograms, but it is currently best represented in base
pairs.
Although humas have ~7times more genes than E. coli, they have
~1000 times more DNA per cell. How do you explain these differences?
– Noncoding DNA. In genomes with a higher percentage of DNA per
gene, more of the DNA simply does not code for RNA. N. lewisi
therefore has ~100times more noncoding DNA than humas. It is now
believed that much of this noncoding DNA has functions in the
regulation of gene expression.
77
Most of the human genome is repetitive DNA
Over half of the human genome is composed of different
types of DNA repeats, which serve a variety of functions.
Centromeres consist of many satellite DNA repats. rDNA
consists of many copies of the genes that produce RNA
that makes ribosomes. SINEs and LINEs have roles in the
chromatin structure and transcriptional regulation.
Chromosome morphology
At a large scale, key regions of the chromosomes include
the telomeres and kinetochores. Telomeres are the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, whose length
must be restored in each cell cycle. Centromeres are the sites of kinetochore formation that allow for
the separation of sister chromatids in anaphase.
Human centromeres are large and highly repetitive
Centromeres are highly divergent through evolution. This is at least partially
due to meiotic drive. Centromeres promote the binding of histones
containing a variant of H3 called CENP-A. CENP-A then provide the platform
for the formation of the kinetochore.
Centromeres are the sites of kinetochore formation
The centromere appears as a constriction* in in condensed chromosomes. The position of the
centromere is fixed, but different chromosomes can have the centromere in different places. The
proteins located at the centromere form the kinetochore, a protein complex to which the
microtubules of the division spindle attach.
The nuclei are specialized areas of the nucleus where the rDNA is located
Cells have up to 10mio ribosomes (some cell types in
animals). The rRNA genes are present as tandem repeats
with 50-200 copies of the 10kb long rDNA. Each repeat
contains the genes for the ribosomal 18S, 5.8S and 28S
(but not for the 5S) rRNA subunits. Despite making up
less than 1% of the genome, over half of the transcription in cells takes place at the rDNA.
Simultaneous transcription of precursor rRNA from multiple loci enables the synthesis of many
ribosomes within a short time.
These repeat regions (rDNA and centromeres) were recently fully sequenced for the human genome.
Chromosome numbers are highly variable in eukaryotes
The number of chromosomes can vary considerably between species. This has an influence on the
degree of mixing of chromosomes in the gametes and thus on the meiotic recombination.
Chromosome numbers can change rapidly in evolution
Robertsonian fusions are a form of translocation in which exchanges occur
near the centromere. This leads to the change in the chromosome number.
An example is the dramatic reduction in the chromosome number by
multiple Robertsonian fusions within a short evolutionary time period in the
dwarf deer genus. Reeve´s Muntjak (Muntiacus reevesi): 2n=46, Vlack Muntjak (Muntiacus
crinifrons): 2n=8(female)/9(male), Indian Muntjak (Muntiacus muntjac vaginalis):
2n=6(female)/7(male).
78
The human karyotype
Karyotype differences between humans and chimps
The human karyotype (2n=46, left chromosomes) differs from
that of the chimpanzee (2n=48, right chromosomes) by
multiple translocations and inversions. The difference between
the human and the chimpanzee genome is mainly in the
chromosomal organization and not in the DNA sequence,
which is 98,8% the same.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
This is a modern method for the determining
of the identity of chromosomes.
Specific FISH probes for each human
chromosome are available for purchase in
different colours.
Chromosome level mutations/disorders
Partial chromosome duplications, deletions,
and inversions
Duplications and deletions can occur when crossovers are unequal in
meiosis. Deletions are typically lethal whereas duplications can lead to
developmental disorders. Inversions will not necessarily affect the
health of the affected person unless they disrupt the gene. However,
they can affect the pairing and formation of crossovers, resulting in
infertility.
Chromosome translocations
Chromosome translocations often occur at sites of homology between
2 chromosomes. Translocations typically result in reproductive issues
due to improper pairing between the homologs in meiosis.
Changes in the chromosome number
Polyploidy is when the whole set of chromosomes is multiplied
(triploidy, tetraploidy, …). Aneuploidy is when individual chromosomes are present or are missing
(trisomy, monosomy). Genome mutations are important to evolution because they result in the
duplication of large numbers of genes, and these additional genes can now mutate to give rise to
new genes. On the other hand, genome mutations can cause serious defects.
Polyploidy
Polyploidy is the change in the number of whole sets of chromosomes (3x – triploidy, 4x –
tetraploidy). There are 2 types of polyploidy. Polyploidy of individual cells or tissues (somatic
79
polyploidy) arises from consecutive replication cycles without the distribution of the chromatids to
daughter nuclei (endomitosis). Polyploidy of germline* cells is resulting in offspring becoming fully
polyploid. It often results from endomitosis in the germline or the failure or termination of meiosis,
resulting in the formation of diploid gametes → polyploid zygote after fertilization. These are
subdivided into autoploidy (all sets of chromosomes come from 1 parent) and allopolyploidy (the
chromosome sets come from different parents (even different species)).
Mechanisms of polyploidization
Somatic polyploidy can occur through a few different
mechanisms. 2 mechanisms are through programmed
processes called endoreplication. Endocycle is when the cells
replicate their genome but never enter mitosis. Endomitosis
is when cells enter mitosis, but intentionally fail to complete
it. Alternatively, cells can become polyploidy through mitotic
errors, here they either fail to segregate their chromosomes
into 2 nuclei or fail to split into 2 cells through cytokinesis.
Extreme levels of polyploidy – polytene chromosomes
Somatic polyploidy is called polyteny. Giant chromosomes are polytene (multiple strands). They
consist of bundles of >1000 chromatin fibres. More and less densely packed sections give a banding
pattern. The giant chromosomes are in the interphase. “Puffs” form in places where they are
particularly loosened up during transcription.
Polyploidy in human cells
Trophoblast giant cells arise from the trophectoderm layer in the blastocyst. Polyploidy comes from
endoreplication. Megakaryocytes switch from a mitotic cell cycle to multiple successive rounds of
endocycle and endomitosis that result in a polyploid nucleus that is 16n on average, even up to 128n.
Adult human cardiomyocytes do not complete cytokinesis despite passing through the S-phase of the
cell cycle. Hepatocyte polyploidization is generally considered an indicator of terminal differentiation
and cellular senescence. About a third of cancers go through a “whole genome duplication” event.
Polyploidy is extremely common in plants
Polyploid plants tent to be more
productive. They have larger cell nuclei and
therefore larger cells and larger growth. If
they are also hybrids (as in alloploidy), they
have the heterozygote advantage
(heterosis, “hybrid vigor*”). The reason for
heterosis is that different alleles are advantageous under variable environmental conditions. These
advantages are often bought at the expense of sterility, and these species must be propagated
vegetatively.
Aneuploidy
Aneuploidy is the change in the number of individual chromosomes (monosomy – 1 copy, trisomy – 3
copies, tetrasomy – 4 copies, …). Aneuploidies usually result from the maldistribution of single
chromosomes in mitosis or meiosis. The best-known example is Down Syndrome (Trisomy 21). It
occurs in ~1 in 1000 births.
Chromosomal aberrations are the cause of over half of all spontaneous abortions in humans
The frequency of chromosomal aberrations among diagnosed human pregnancies (?). Approximately
10-50% of all zygotes die before a recognizable pregnancy. Therefore, they cannot be analysed, yet
80
may still play a large part in reproductive
tissues. About 1 in 250 people have a
chromosomal disorder.
Development of aneuploidies by
missegregation is in the 1st or 2nd meiosis
Human meiotic chromosome segregation is highly error prone
Chromosome segreation errors are much more common in the oocyte than in mitosis and they
become much more common with maternal age.
Methods for detecting aneuploidy in utero
Amniocentesis is a procedure where a needle is inserted into the amniotic sac to remove sloughed
off* foetal cells for karyotype analysis. Biopsy from chorionic* villus is similar to amniocentesis, but
the cells are cut off from a part of the placenta instead. Nuchal* translucency scan is an impressive
but non-invasive method that involves measuring the amount of fluid in a space at the base of the
neck during a sonogram. Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) testing is when blood from the mother is taken to
analyse pieces of the foetal DNA that is floating around the plasma.
Non-invasive prenatal screening for
aneuploidy is based on sequence
polymorphisms and sequences
frequencies from cell-free DNA in the
maternal blood (~10% of the DNA is
foetal during early pregnancy).
The role of chromosomal mutations in
evolution
Duplications enable the emergence of new genes. From a duplicated gene, a copy can retain the
original function. The other copy changes over time through mutations, will usually degenerate
(pseudogene), but can also be given a new function and thus become a new gene. As evidence for
this phenomenon, many vertebrates have clearly undergone polyploidization events during their
evolution. Chromosomal structural changes lead to hybrid sterility and thus to the reproductive
isolation of populations. This has been proposed to enable the formation of new species. However,
the exact mechanism is unclear since the 1st individual to undergo a major structural change would
have nobody to successfully mate with.
81
Genetics 11
Categories and examples of genetic diseases
Examples of human diseases with a clear genetic cause
Form of inheritance of gene mutations
Forms are:
• Autosomal dominant e.g., Huntington´s disease, Achondroplasia
• Autosomal recessive e.g., Cystic Fibrosis, Phenylketonuria, Tay-Sachs-Synsdrome, Sickle cell
anaemia
• X-chromosomal recessive e.g., Haemophilia A and B, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, colour
blindness
• X-chromosomal dominant e.g., Hypophosphatemia
Autosomal inheritance is when the trait-causing gene is on a non-sex chromosome. Gonosomal
inheritance (X-linked, Y-linked) is when the trait-causing gene is on a sex chromosome (X/Y). there
are no known Y-chromosomal hereditary diseases in humans.
Pedigree analysis provides information about the occurrence of a (clinical) characteristic over the
generations and whether and how it can be inherited.
Only some developmental defects are due to mutations
and only some of those are hereditary. Developmental
defects are classified into environmental defects (e.g.,
maternal illnesses, medicines, drugs, perinatal damage)
and genetic defects, which are further classifies into de
novo (none of descendants has the disorder) and
hereditary (tracing back possible). There are
standardized symbols for the creation of family trees.
Many genetic diseases are researched with twin studies.
If 2 identical twins have the disease, it is probably from a genetic origin. Some diseases are more
common if 1 twin has it, e.g., schizophrenia.
Autosomal dominant inheritance
If 1 parent is affected, 50% of the offspring
will be affected, if the parents are not
affected, no child will be affected. Examples are Huntington disease (1:20.000 – 1:100.000) and
Achondroplasia (~1:40.000).
82
Achondroplasia
Achondroplasia is caused by a missense mutation
in the fibroblast growth factor receptor gene
FGFR3. This leads to premature ossification of
the cartilage in the bone growth zone and
therefore v. a. to shorten the extremities.
Huntington disease (Huntington Chorea)
This is a hereditary disease caused by trinucleotide repeats. About 30 disorders caused by elongated
repeats are known, most of which are dominant. Gene sequences with repetitive sections are
particularly susceptible to replication errors (replication slippage). These repetitive sequences can be
multiplied (repeat expansion). Trinucleotide repeats result in aberrant* proteins with multiple
repeats of the amino acid in question (such as glutamic acid in the protein huntingtin in Huntington´s
disease), which then do not function properly and/or cannot be broken down properly.
Mutated huntingtin protein cannot be broken down and accumulates in neurons over time,
destroying them. This neurodegeneration causes dementia, incoordination, and eventually death.
Generally, the disease only manifests after the age at which one
has children. Therefore, early diagnosis would be advisable if one
wishes to have children. However, the diagnosis is extremely
psychologically stressful for a young, still healthy person who
carries the mutation, because it not only predicts the risk of passing
on the disease, but also one´s one disease, for which there is no
therapy yet.
Explanation for the dominance of a defective allele
Haploinsufficiency is when only 1 copy of the gene creates half of the gene product compared to 2
copies. In some cases, this partial deficiency of function is enough to elicit a phenotype. An example
is Dyskeratosis congenita (DKC) where mutations are in telomerase genes that result in premature
aging and cancer. The dominant negative effect is when a mutated protein has increased function
that makes it overactive (e.g., Achondroplasia and the overactive mutated form of FGFR3), or the
mutant allele creates a protein that has a toxic effect on the cells (e.g., Huntington disease and the
aberrant folding of the huntingtin protein). Homozygous mutations of autosomal dominant disorders
are often lethal and typically do not result in live births.
Autosomal recessive inheritance
Examples are cystic fibrosis, a defect in the membrane channels for chloride ions – thick mucus →
suffocation. About 1 in 8000 new-borns has Phenylketonuria. This is an inability to metabolize
phenylalanine – a toxic intermediate phenylketone in the urine occurs. The disease leads to severe
dementia and behavioural disorder. The Tay-Sachs syndrome has a non-functional enzyme which
causes a lipid in nerve cells to be broken down improperly, forming a toxic intermediate. This leads to
blindness and dementia beginning a few months after birth (there is an increased frequency in a
small population – a particular mutant allele is found in 4% of East European Ashkenazi Jews). Sickle
cell anaemia is a misfolded haemoglobin which leads to impaired oxygen in the blood.
Cause of sickle cell anaemia
Adult haemoglobin (Hb A) consists of 2 α and 2 β subunits. In the most common
disease-related allele, a valine instead of a glutamic acid at position 6 of the β
chain causes the phenotype. Sickle cell haemoglobin is not globular but
filamentous. With low oxygen pressure such as at high altitudes, the
erythrocytes are deformed and fragile. Over 100.000 people die of sickle cell
anaemia every year.
83
Autosomal dominant inheritance of sickle cell
anaemia. Heterozygotes (carriers) of autosomal
recessive defects are often completely healthy.
However, in the case of sickle cell anaemia,
heterozygotes show a weak phenotype. They
form 3 types of Hb A haemoglobin
macromolecules: 50% with 1 normal and 1 defective β chain, 25% with 2 normal β chains, and 25%
with 2 defective β chains. Intriguingly, heterozygous carriers have a resistance to malaria, which likely
explains why this disease is so prevalent in certain populations.
Autosomal recessive disorders are more common in children of related parents (inbreeding)
The rarer a recessive allele is in a
population, the greater the contribution
of intermarriages to the occurrence of
homozygous individuals. If the frequency of a defective allele in the population is 0,2%, then the risk
of having a sick child in cousin marriages is 32times higher than in random marriages. If an individual
carries a recessive allele, the probability that a relative also carries it depends not only on the
frequency of the allele in the total population, but primarily of the degree of relatedness. This
relatedness factor is fixed, whereas is accidental marriages the frequency of homozygous affected
offspring decreases with the square of the frequency of the allele.
Calculation of the probability of an affected child in a 1st cousin
marriage with a partner as a carrier: if III-1 is a carrier, then the
probability that II-2 is a carrier is ½. If II-2 is a carrier, then the
probability that II-3 is a carrier is ½ (it must have been I-1 or I-2
carrier). If II-3 is a carrier, then the probability that III-2 is a carrier is
½. The probability that both cousins III-1 and III-2 are carriers is ½ * ½
* ½ = 1/8 (12,5%). The child of III-1 and III-2 will have a probability of
¼ * 1/8 = 1/32 (3,125%) to be homozygous for the defective allele. For the sake of simplicity, the
small additional probability of III-2 acquired the defective allele independently (namely from II-4) is
not taken into the calculation. This probability corresponds to the frequency of the defective allele in
the overall population.
X-linked recessive inheritance
Examples are Haemophilia A,
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, redgreen blindness, Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). Women can be recessive with diseases on the Xchromosome because there is a 2nd X-chromosome. If the father has it, all daughter get it (X from
father) and sons do not (Y from father). If the mother has it, sons have a 50/50 chance of getting it (?)
and daughters have a 50/50 chance of getting it.
The following image shows the pedigree* of Queen Victoria´s descendants.
84
X-linked dominant inheritance
An example is
Hypophosphatemia, a
decreased phosphorus titer* in
the blood serum.
What would a hypothetical Y-chromosomal inheritance look like?
Only sons would be affected, and they would always be affected. Obviously affected
men would need to be at least partially fertile. So far, no diseases with Y-chromosomal
inheritance are known. This is likely at least partially because of how genes on the Y-chromosome,
and loss-of-function mutations in those that do exist tend to result in fertility problems (?).
Mitochondrial inheritance
Human mitochondria contain 13 genes. Mutations in these genes that cause disease
pass from mothers to all of their children. Often not fully penetrant. An example is
Leber´s hereditary optic neuropathy. This is a partial to complete loss of vision due to
degeneration of the retinal ganglion cells.
Online Mendelian inheritance in man (OMIM)
This is a database with over 6000 clinical
phenotypes with known DNA sequence
anomalies. Around 1 in 50 people are affected
by a known single gene disorder.
Frequency of genetic diseases
If there are family diseases or high-risk
pregnancies, genetic counselling can be
used. Depending on the indication,
pedigree analysis, genetic tests on the
parents and prenatal diagnosis are carried
out. “Congenital deafness” is how this
apparently contradictory family tree from
human genetic practice to be interpreted?
Through genetic heterogeneity, i.e., damage in
multiple different genes can each cause the defect
when homozygous. 1 possibility would be e.g. (image
on the right). Individuals are affected because they
are homozygous for a defective d allele (ddEE) or
because they have 2 defective e alleles of another
gene (DDee). Her offspring will be heterozygous DdEe and healthy.
Methods for determining the cause(s) of genetic diseases
At identity by descent (IBD) mapping: single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) arrays are used to
associate regions of chromosomes with the phenotype between family members. Comparison
between multiple families can further narrow down the region of interest. Whole genome
sequencing: rather than trying to look for the region associated with the gene, sequencing of the
85
expressed regions of the genome can attempt to specifically identify mutated
genes correlated with the phenotype. Genome wide association studies (GWAS):
for cases where many genes contribute to a phenotype, correlations between
SNPs and the phenotype can be performed for thousands of individuals
independently of any knowledge of family history.
De novo mutations that lead to disease
Dominant mutations that prevent reproduction are typically acquired de novo
(not inherited). These are typically very rare. Examples are Progeria, an extremely rare autosomal
dominant genetic disorder in which patients appear to age extremely rapidly. Often caused by
mutations in lamins, which support the shape and function of the nuclei. XY gonadal dysgenesis are
phenotypical female people with a Y-chromosome. It is often associated with de novo mutations in
the SRY gene.
Ethical considerations in human genetics
The ethics of human genetics
“Designer children”
There are ethical debates in human genetics. Embryo screening and
preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is genetic screening for specific
disorders prior to implantation of an embryo. It is used for couples that
know they have a high chance of passing on a genetic disorder such as Huntington, Duchenne, cystic
fibrosis, and over 100 other conditions. Sometimes it is used to select for only females if there is a
history of X-linked recessive disorders. It is legal in Austria as of 2015. Prenatal screening to eliminate
undesired traits. In the last lecture, ways of identifying chromosomal abnormalities in a developing
foetus were mentioned. Depending on the results, the couples could choose to abort the foetus. In
theory, the same techniques could be used to determine a huge variety of genetic traits. Where do
we draw the line?
Taboo subjects
Genetic research into certain subjects has been restricted due to the potential societal implication of
what might be discovered. These include:
• Intelligence: research based on twin studies has shown that ~50% of intelligence likely has a
genetic basis. However, determining which genes and alleles are most closely linked to
higher intelligence has potentially troubling applications including preimplantation screening,
workplace discrimination, eugenics, and demotivation for individuals with genotypes
deemed substandard. Furthermore, intelligence is a very complex trait and there are many
different types of intelligence that may be overlooked.
• Sexual orientation: a few decades ago, research into a genetic basis for sexual orientation
was discouraged because attempts to show a genetic link might discredit the then-dominant
social view that sexual orientation is a “choice”. Now, societal trends have changed to the
extent that research which fails to show a clear genetic basis behind sexual orientation is
viewed as potentially dangerous if used by groups that wish to justify discrimination based
on sexual orientation. Twin studies have shown that ~30 percent of non-heterosexuality
likely has a genetic basis.
• Race: Research into the genetic associations with race have historically been problematic
when combined with other desirable traits such as intelligence. However, more recently
there has been a focus on including racial demographics when studying the effects of disease
treatments as the efficacy of treatments are primarily based on the most highly represented
race in any given society. There are many examples where such findings do not extend to
other races.
It is currently best that we do not know how these are made or which genes make them.
86
Eugenics
British anthropologist Francis Galton founded the eugenics movement on the premise that
extraordinary abilities as well as defects, were inherited. The movement led to abuses, such as forces
sterilization of people deemed mentally inferior – generally minorities, poor people, and especially
people with mental illnesses. This happened in countries around the world, including Germany, the
US, Belgium, Canada, and Sweden.
“Psychologisch schädliche Ehen sind zu verhindern“ (Ruppin, 1903).
“Rechtfertigung der Sterilisation aus rassenhygienischen Gründen“ (Ziegler, 1917).
Current controversies
CRISPR babies, a reasonable idea implemented too soon? In 2018 a researcher in China engineered 2
embryos with an allele associated with HIV resistance and implanted them, which resulted in 3
babies with altered genomes. The head researcher was sentenced to 3 years in prison.
Humanized animals, should animals be engineered to be better organ donors? Organs from pigs that
have been engineered not to produce strong immune responses in humans have recently been used
for heart and kidney transplants.
Human/animal hybrids, wait, this is a thing? Last year a group published results form the
development of monkey embryos injected with human stem cells. The embryos lived for up to 19
days.
1
st of the big 2 – heart disease
Most people die of cancer or heart disease.
Types of familial (inherited) heart disease
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an
autosomal dominant mutation in the LDLR or
APOB genes, which lead to high levels of lowdensity lipoprotein (LDL, bad cholesterol). It
affects ~1 in 250 people. Familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused by
autosomal dominant mutations in 1 of 9
genes, most of which are related to myosin (muscle) function. These mutations lead to a thickening
of the heart. If affects ~1 in 500 people. Familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is caused by mostly
autosomal dominant mutations that lead to an enlarged and weakened heart. At least 20 genes have
been associated with DCM, but most cases have an unknown genetic basis. It affects ~1 in 2500
people and is the most common cause of heart transplants.
Pathway disrupted by mutations in familial hypercholesterolemia (FH)
Mutations in the LDLR or APOB genes act
dominantly through haploinsufficiency. Lowdensity lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Cholesterol
bound to LDL is recognized by ApoB, which allows it
to enter the cells via recognition by LDLR and
endocytosis. Defects in this process result in more
cholesterol in the blood vessels instead of in cells.
Treatment of FH is typically through statins and dietary restrictions.
Partially inherited (complex) heart disease
Coronary atery disease (CAD) is a buildup of plaque in the arteries. It is the most common cause of
death worldwide (~15%). The heritability of CAD is estimated at 40-60%. GWAS studies have found
over 160 genetic susceptibility loci (image next page).
87
Strategy for using genetic information on CAD for targeted treatment
So how do we use information with so many genes
potentially contributing to the disease? In the future, we
hope that sequencing information and mathematical
models will be able to assess the risk of CAD and inform
potential dietary precautions and drug treatment. With
enough information, such treatments could even be
tailored to a patient’s specific mutations.
88
Genetics 12
General properties of cancer
Cancers are defined by uncontrolled cell growth and
division. Solid tumours become especially deadly
after they metastasize, gaining the ability to grow in
many different parts of the body.
Cancer is not a single disease
Different cancer types have a huge range of prognoses. Some types have
relatively straight forwarded and effective treatments whereas other types are
extremely difficult to treat. Even within cancer types, there are wide ranges of
sub-types that can greatly influence the disease progression and treatment
options. There is generally a higher survival rate with cancer in tissues that are
not necessary for survival e.g., testicular cancer.
Hallmarks* of cancer
There are certain hallmarks of cancer that are extremely
common across many cancer types. These changes are often
necessary for continued growth. Not a single mutation can do all
changes. Many mutations are acquired with time.
Cancers must prevent apoptosis and evade the immune system
In addition to continuing to divide, cancer cells must also find
ways to prevent death. When cells accumulate large amounts of
DNA damage, they ordinarily undergo programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Some of the most
common cancer mutations prevent apoptosis from occuring. In addition, the immune system targets
cells with certain types of DNA damage. Cancer cells must therefore also evade* detection by the
immune system.
Cell cycle checkpoints ordinarily prevent unregulated proliferation
Although the metazoan-specific checkpoint pathways
are more specific for preventing cancer, some of the
universal checkpoint pathways also contain many
oncogenes and tumor surpressors. Why would
unicellular eukaryotes such as yeast that cannot get
cancer still have tumor surpressors?
Cancer and cell cycle entry
Cell cycle progression is controlled by cyclins, which activate cyclin
dependent kinases (CDKs). CDKs phosphorylate many substrates
throughout the cell cycle to trigger events related to DNA
replicatoin and mitosis. Cyclins E and D are the ones that are most
relevant to cancer, as they are required for cell cycle entry, which is
often referred to as the “restriction point”.
Types of mutations in cancer
Genome instability is a hallmark of cancer
The simplest way to get many mutations is to increase the rate at which mutations
accumulate. This increase in mutation rate is called genetic instability.
89
Different sources of mutations in cancer
There are many different sources for mutations:
• Radiation: UV light → skin cancer
• Carcinogens: cigarette smoke → lung cancer
• Viruses: HPV → cervical cancer*
• DNA replication: polymerase errors → all cancers
Some sources of mutation are specific to certain types of cancer, depending on the tissues they
affect. However, errors in DNA replication are by far the most common source of mutation and can
affect any cell type.
The number of mutations varies by cancer type
Solid tumours have ~200 mutations in genes. Hematopoietic (blood) cancers
have considerably fewer. Skin and lung cancers have the most mutations
(likely due to UV damage and cigarette smoke). Only about 5 mutations per
cancer are thought to substantially contribute to cancer formation. Most
mutations are not going to have any effect, e.g., non-coding regions.
Many different types of mutations can contribute
to cancer
The type of mutation can greatly influence the
affect it has on a gene. For example,
insertions/deletions inside of a gene will almost
always activate it. By contrast, gene amplification
will almost always increase its activity.
Chromosome level mutations in cancer
Translocations are when part of 1 chromosome is exchanged with another, the region of the
breakpoint can be affected. This can either disrupt the function of the gene, create fusions between
2 genes, or change the regulatory regions surrounding a gene. All chronic myeloid leukaemias have a
translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22, creating a fusion known as the “Philadelphia
chromosome”. This creates a fusion between the BCR and ABL1 genes, which is a gain of function
mutation.
Aneuploidy is found in 90% of solid tumours. In theory, extra copies of
chromosomes will activate the oncogenes and fewer copies of chromosomes will
decrease the activity of tumour suppressors on those chromosomes. Whole
genome duplication (polyploidy) occurs in about 1/3 of solid tumours. Since all
genes are increased in copy number equally, gene expression should not really be
affected. The role in cancer progression is currently unclear.
Oncogenes and tumour suppressors
The normal function of tumour suppressors prevents unregulated growth. The deactivation leads to
cancer. The normal function of oncogenes promotes growth. Overactivation leads to cancer.
Clarifying different types of mutations
Dominant is when only 1 copy is needed for
a phenotype, recessive is when both copies
are needed. Overactive is a gain of function.
90
Many different types of mutations can contribute to cancer
Whether a particular type of mutation is more likely to
occur in an oncogene or tumour suppressor depends on
whether it is more likely to activate or inactivate a gene.
For example, insertions and deletions almost always
inactivate genes due to frame shifts that completely alter the codons used downstream of the
mutation.
Common proto-oncogenes and
tumour suppressors
The function of these is not to
create cancer but they can be
altered to promote cancer.
BRAF – proto-oncogene in a kinase cascade that signals cells to proliferate
In the presence of gain-of-function BRAF mutations, constitutive activation
of signalling is independent of extracellular factors and does not respond to
biochemical signals that would normally regulate activity.
Telomerase (TERT) – needed by cancers to prevent the degradation of
chromosome ends over time
A reminder: telomerase is a reverse transcriptase that extends the 3’ ends of DNA at
the ends of chromosomes. This fixes the “end replication problem” created by the
removal of RNA primers on chromosome ends.
TRF1 is a telomere binding protein that inhibits telomerase. Phosphorylation by ERK
inhibits TRF1, allowing telomerase to function. Telomerase is not frequently
mutated in cancer. Instead, it is re-activated in differentiated tissues that would
normally no longer require telomerase activity.
The 1st tumour suppressor discovered – RB1
RB1 binds to and inhibits E2F proteins, which are transcription
factors that promote the expression of genes necessary for cell cycle
entry and DNA replication.
When RB1 is mutated, it can no longer suppress E2F proteins. This
results in permanent activation of cell proliferation genes.
The most frequent mutated tumour suppressor – p53 (TP53)
p53 is part of a cellular response that senses DNA
damage and prevents cell cycle procession until
the damage has been fixed. If the damage cannot
be fixed, p53 signals for cell death instead.
In the absence of p53, cells can enter and progress
through the cell cycle even in the presence of DNA
damage. It jumps straight to the cell cycle.
The cancer genome atlas (TCGA) – a large database of
cancer mutations
91
Cancer when one is old because 2 mutations
need to happen → takes time.
Viruses that integrate into the genome often promote cancer
Viruses can lead to cancer by disrupting tumour suppressor genes or proto-oncogenes where they
insert into the genome, or by directly promoting cell proliferation (example: both HPV and EBC
encode for a protein that inhibits RB1
expression). Viruses do not want a cell
to die so they inhibit p53 for example so
that the cell can continue to grow.
Inherited cancer predisposition mutations
Many inherited cancer predisposition genes are involved in DNA
repair. These include BRCA1, CDKN2, MSH2, MSH6, and TP53.
These do not all affect the same repair pathway, and therefore
result in different types of cancer, depending on how much certain
cell types rely on different repair pathways. Around 5-10% of
cancers are associated with inherited mutation. The rest are
sporadic cancers. They are typically inherited in a dominant way.
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of tumour suppressor gene mutations
The two-hit hypothesis states that cancers require 2 separate mutational events to inactivate both
copies of a tumour suppressor gene. LOH is essentially a simplified way of getting the 2nd hit from the
two-hit hypothesis. After the 1st copy of the gene is mutated, the mutated copy can be transferred to
the other chromosome through various mechanisms such as gene conversion.
Recent breakthroughs in cancer precision medicine
Cancer precision medicine aims to specifically target the mutations present in the patient´s tumour.
This can allow for higher efficacy* and fewer side effects than traditional chemotherapy drugs.
Cancer when one is younger because 1 mutation
is already there → takes less time.
92
Genetics 13
Gene mapping
• Genetic mapping (linkage mapping): different alleles and meiotic recombination allow the
assignment of genes to a particular chromosome and the determination of their
arrangement within the chromosome. It was replaced by physical mapping and is rarely used
• Chromosomal mapping: microscopical localization of genes or DNA sequences on
chromosomes, e.g., by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or deletion mapping
• Physical mapping: gene prediction and chromosomal localization of genes by DNA
sequencing
How genes are assigned to chromosomes
Genes without a “+” are mutated.
How to determine the position of genes within a chromosome
Incomplete linkage is due to recombination (crossing-over between 2
genetic loci). The ratios of gamete types are not equal since recombination
between 2 genes is the more seldom* the closer together they are on the
chromosome.
Linkage of 2 traits
Progeny display the parental phenotype more often than
recombinant phenotypes (?).
Crossing experiment fore gene mapping
The “backcross” is a heterozygote × recessive homozygote (b+ b
vg+
v × b b vg vg). Crossovers result in recombined chromosomes
in the gametes. To monitor recombination events by recombined
phenotypes in adult animals, these gametes must be crossed to
gametes carrying the recessive alleles. This problem is avoided in
the haploid genetics of bacteria and yeasts where a phenotype is
directly visible in the haploid products of meiosis.
The recombination frequency is measured in Morgan-Units
1 centi-Morgan (cM) corresponds to 1% recombination between 2
gene markers. 50cM corresponds to 50% recombination = free
93
combination. If only 2 genes are located on different chromosomes
or widely spaced on 1 chromosome. The observed frequency of e.g.,
20% chiasmata or crossovers within a certain interval on a
chromosome corresponds to 10% genetic recombination (10cM)
because only 2 of the 4 chromatids of a bivalent recombine. I.e., 1 chiasma endows* 2 of 4 gametes
and hence 2 out of 4 progenies with recombined chromosomes.
Gene mapping by 3-factor-crossing
What is the order of the 3 genes R, G, and B along the chromosome?
Since crossovers are relatively rare events and the exchange of the
gene in the middle needs 2 of them, the
gene with the lowest rate, will be the one
in the middle, i.e., B.
But what are the relative distances between genes?
How often will there be an exchange between R and B? The frequency will
be the sum of the exchanges in the intervals R-B and R-B-G → 25.1 + 2.2 =
27.3.
But what are the realtive distances between genes?
How frequent is the exchange between B and G? The sum of the exchanges
in B-G and R-B-G → 18.9 + 2.2 = 21.1.
The distances of R-B-G in cM
27.3 + 21.1 = 48.4 between R and G. Recombination frequency between R
and G, disregarding trait B would only be 25.1 + 18.9 = 44. The double
recombination events between R and G would go unnoticed and their
genetical distance would be underestimated. Thus, the smaller the examined
intervals, the more precise is the genetical map.
Adding more genes to the genetical map
Note that there, the frequency of parental types is under
50%. This is because these genes are far apart on the
chromosome and have many crossovers between them, such
that they appear unlinked.
Again, it is assumed that the gene with the lowest
recombination frequency, i.e., G, locates bewteen the
others. The recombination chart of the 2nd crossing shows
the following distances: R-G: 48.4cM, G-S: 28cM, R-S: 48.8cM
94
(disregarding multiple crossovers). There is a discrepancy
between the exchange frequency of the most distand loci
R and S and the sum of exchanges in the intervals in
between. The recombination frequency between pairs of
gene loci cannot exceed 50cM. The sum of recombination
frequencies between multiple gene loci can exceed 50cM.
Deletion maps using giant (polytene)
chromosome of Drosophila
Deletions (loss of chromosome parts) allow the
allocation of a gene to a certain subregion/band.
The loss of certain bands correlates with an
abnormal phenotype, in this case, the rosy eye
colour.
Conventional genetics and linkage-mapping is
being replaced by reverse genetics
Conventional (forward) genetics encompasses the
mapping of identified genes (e.g., from a mutant
screen). Reverse genetics maps genes and other
functional DNA sequences (genome annotation).
Conventional genetics constructs a genetic map,
reverse genetics a physical map of the genome.
Is there a gene and if so, where is it?
Gene prediction
An open reading frame (ORF) normally starts with an ATG and ends
with a stop codon (TAA, TAG, TGA). Following a start codon, every 16
triplets a stop codon is statistically expected (varies depending on the
GC content of the genome). Therefore, a random occurrence of stops
after more than 50 triplets is rare. ORFs are typically even longer (in E.
coli on average 370 triplets, in baker´s yeast 483 triplets, in humans
450 triplets). Criteria for the recognition of a gene-coding sequence:
95
• Search in all 6 reading frames for an as-long-as-possible stretch between an ATG (start) and a
stop
• Search for deviating AT-GC ratios. In genes, it is rather close to 1:1, while in non-coding
regions it is AT>GC
• Search for characteristic sequence motifs of promoters or transcription/translation start: CpG
islands (in eukaryotes), where the sequence CG occurs ~5times more often than statistically
expected, TATA-boxes (in many genes), transcription-initiator regions, Kozak-sequences, …
Bioinformatic (sequence based) gene prediction must be
confirmed by empirical methods (cDNA sequencing,
homology searches, knockout experiments, …). For
instance, a sequence is very probably a gene if a
mutation in this sequence elicits an altered phenotype.
Definitive information of a gene comes only from the
presence of a transcript (verified by cDNA sequencing). This then also shows the presence of (in this
case 2) introns in the genomic DNA, which are missing in the processed mRNA.
Physical gene map
Genome annotation is the gain of biological information
from sequences. It includes the identification of ORFs
(gene prediction), promoters, introns, transposons,
regulatory sequences, noncoding repetitive sequences, and other features. Graphical representation
of a 50kb-section from an annotated sequence with predicted genes (cyan) and sequenced mRNA
(blue). Note that the direction of arrows indicates that genes are encoded in opposite directions (i.e.,
on both DNA strands). This example is taken from the model organism Tetrahymena thermophila, a
ciliate. In this organism, gene density is much higher than in humans. The 50kb region shown here
represents only 1/2000 or the Tetrahymena genome. In humans, a similar 50kb-section would
represent only ~1/60.000 of the genome. This illustrates that genome annotation is still a formidable
task.
Comparison of genetic and physical mapping of genes to chromosome III of baker´s yeast
The physical gene map is constructed by DNA-sequencing. It indicates by how much DNA genes are
separated, and it is measured in base pairs (bp). The order, but not relative distances between genes,
are correctly represented in the genetical map. The reason for this inconsistency is the uneven
distribution of meiotic exchanges (crossovers) along
chromosomes. The relative distances do not fit because the
recombination frequencies are not even on the chromosome).
Genetics and reproduction
The advantage of sexual reproduction
Diploidy, the possession of multiple alleles (and the resultant heterosis effect (advantage of
individuals that possess different alleles of many genes)), and genetic recombination are causally
96
related to sexual reproduction. In sexual reproduction, 2 partners contribute their haploid genomes
to the mixed diploid genome of the offspring.
But sexual reproduction is inefficient (the twofold cost of males). Drawback 1: in a sexually
reproducing population, usually half of the progeny are males. These do not produce offspring
themselves but contribute to the progeny of females. An apomictic/parthenogenetically reproducing
population produces twice as many progenies per generation. Drawback 2: in order to propagate
sexuality, partners must find each other in the 1
st place
(problem in spaced populations). Because of the obvious
inefficiency of sexual reproduction, the question of its
evolutionary origin is still under debate. While sex offers
advantages over evolutionary periods, it has to be assumed
that it must have short-term advantages as well, allowing it to
compete with permanently originating fast-spreading asexual
population.
Forms of sex determination
• Non-genetic (environmental) sex determination: primarily temperature-dependent sex
determination in reptiles, seasonal influence in water fleas (Daphnia), age-dependent sex in
pufferfish, modificatory sex determination in green spoon worms* Bonellia (larvae become
male when they attach to a female adult)
• Genetic sex determination
o Monogenetic sex determination, commonly associated with structurally different sex
chromosomes, e.g., the XY system in humans and most other animals, the WZ system
(ZZ male, WZ female) in e.g., birds, the X0 system (X0 male, XX female) in many
insects. A master-gene (SRY in mammals encodes the transcription factor TDS (testis
determining factor)) governs the activity of secondary genes, which, in turn, encode
for sex-specific characteristics
o Polygenic sex determination is known from various insects, mammals, fishes, and
plants. These may possess numerous sex chromosomes or additional sexdetermining genes on autosomes
• Mixed genetic and environmental sex determination: in the lizard Pogona vitticeps WZindividuals are female, ZZ individuals are normally male. However, at elevated temperatures,
ZZ-eggs develop into females, resulting in up to 20% female ZZ-individuals in the wild
Further classification of genetic sex determination systems
Monogenic systems for sex determination ensure the 1:1 ratio of
male and female zygote
Monogenic systems work according to the backcrossing scheme. The
cross of a heterozygous with a recessive homozygous individual
97
produces 50% heterozygous progeny. In humans, the Y-chromosome (precisely the SRY region) is the
dominant factor for sex determination. Heterogametic is the sex with different sex chromosomes
and homogametic is the sex with uniform sex chromosomes.
Polygenic sex determination
In polygenic sex determination there exist many sexdetermining genes, which may even locate to different
chromosome. In the case of the African pigmy mouse, Mus
minutoides, there are female sex-relevant genes on 2
chromosomes, X and W. The W locus is dominant over the male
determining factor in the Y. This is then X and W exist together in an individual, it is female. This
results in a 1male:2female sex ratio, which is advantageous for some species.
Deletion mapping of the sex-determining region on the Y (SRY) using patients with truncated* Y
chromosomes
In mammals, the SRY locus on the Y includes the formation
of testes in the embryo (thus: testes determining factor –
TDF), and thereby male sex determination. If SRY is
missing, the gonads develop into ovaries, and further
development leads to female individuals.
The genetic deterioration of the Y
The X carries around 1000 genes, of which a part is sex relevant. The Y carries only ca. 50 genes
outside the PAR, most of which are sex relevant. The remainder are probably pseudogenes or genes
that are duplications of autosomal genes. Chromosomes that carry dominant sex determining (i.e.,
those, which are present only in the heterogametic sex) are prone to erosion. Males are hemizygous
for X-chromosomal genes. In Drosophila (XY, XX), this process of degeneration is at an advanced
stage. The Y is not essential. X0 individuals are, but sterile. Sex depends on the ratio of X to
autosomes: 2X:2A → female, 1X:2A → male, 3X:4A (polyploid) → Intersexes. In the spine rat
Tokudaia osimensis, both sexes are of the karyotype X0. The Y including the SRF/TDF got lost. Also,
some species of lemmings no longer have a Y. Will the human Y get lost one day too? Probably not so
soon. Comparisons with rhesus monkeys showed that the human Y has lost only a single gene over
the past 25mio years.
A gene map of the human Y
In order to maintain linkage of sex-relevant genes on the X and Y, recombination is suppressed. If
such a gene mutates on the Y, it cannot be restored by homologous recombination. This is not the
case for genes on the X chromosomes, because recombination can occur between 2 Xs in females.
Moreover, gene loss on the Y is tolerated because there are no individuals with Ys only.
The consequence of X hemizygosity in males and the genetic depletion of the Y: males are more
often affected by X-linked recessive defects
X-chromosomal recessive
inheritance. The mother
transmits a defective gene to
50% of progeny. 50% of sons
are sick. 50% of daughters are
carriers. A diseased father transmits to none of his sons but to all of his daughters. Around 250
recessive X-linked traits/diseases are known in humans. Examples are shown in the table.
98
The obligatory crossover in the pseudo autosomal region (PAR) of sex
chromosomes
Despite their heteromorphism and low homology, X and Y must pair
and perform crossing over in male meiosis. The pseudo autosomal
region (PAR) is not home to sex-relevant genes. The PAR behaves like a
non-sex chromosome, i.e., an autosome. Within the PAR, a crossover
(the "Obligatory Crossover") must occur, without causing the exchange
of sex-relevant genes between the X and the Y.
Sex influences the expression of autosomal genes
Examples of sex-dependent (hormone caused) expression of autosomal inherited traits are hairy
ears, which is found only in men. This trait was formerly misinterpreted as Y-chromosomal
inheritance. Another example is androgenic loss of hair. An autosomal gene, important for scalp hair
growth exists as 2 alleles. The expression of the dominant baldness-promoting allele B is sensitive to
the androgen Prostaglandin D2. Therefore, B b men are bald and B b women are not bald. In women
with B B, the phenotype is weaker and appears later in life when
the production of androgens increases in women. Allele B is
rare.
X-chromosomal dosage compensation
In the female embryo, gene transcription from 1 of the 2 X chromosomes becomes inactivated. This
X-inactivation takes place in order to ensure that females do not express twice as many Xchromosomal genes as males (Hypothesis by Mary F. Lyon, 1961). Thus, the ratio of X-chromosomal
to autosomal gene dosage is equally balanced in both sexes. This holds for mammals. Other animals
have other mechanisms for gene dosage compensation. The Barr Body within the nucleus is the
cytological manifestation of the largely inactive 2nd X-chromosome in females – it is hyper condensed
(heterochromatic) and late replicating.
Women are mosaics with respect to the active X-chromosome
During development of the female embryo, X-chromosomes are randomly inactivated in different
cells.
Aneuploidy of sex chromosomes
The external phenotype of the Turner- (X0 women) and Klinefelter (XXY man)-syndroms are relatively
mild. However, affected people are mostly infertile.
99
Known aneuploidies of sex chromosomes
Sex reversal syndromes
100
Genetics 14
Developmental genetics
Genes can be grouped into housekeeping genes (control essential functions of all cells), cell typespecific genes, externally inducible genes (activation dependent on nutrition, temperature, stress, …),
and developmental genes. Developmental genetics studies the genetic control of cell growth, cell
differentiation, and cell specialization in different cell types, tissues, and organs. Developmental
genes control the differentiation of cells during embryonic development. These are segmentation
genes and homeotic* genes in animals and organ identity genes in plants. Developmental genes
encode transcription factors, which are proteins that control the transcription (and thereby the
activity) of other genes.
Segmental body plans
Multicellular animals have many genes, genetic pathways, and molecular signalling mechanisms in
common, which control the development from the zygote to the embryo to the adult organism.
Similar developmental programs have independently evolved in plants. As a general rule,
multicellular organisms show a segmental body plan. This is due to the evolution of multicellular
organisms by the composition of identical subunits according to the molecular design principle,
followed by the specialization of these segments. These commonalities allow the study of conserved
mechanisms using a few well-suited organisms (model organisms). Common model organisms for
developmental genetics are the threadworm (Caenorhabditis elegans), the fruit fly (Drosophila
melanogaster), the zebra fish (Danio rerio), and the thale cress (Arabidopsis thaliana).
Embryonic development in Drosophila
It was shown in Drosophila, that cell
differentiation of the embryo is initiated by
gradients of maternal gene products (RNAs,
proteins) within the zygote. The positional
information, which is determined by these
molecular gradients, control the expression of 2
groups of genes that are transcribed in the
zygote and in the embryo. These are the
segmentation genes and the homeotic genes.
More than 20 segmentation genes are known,
and they are grouped in: gap genes, pair-rule
genes, and segment-polarity genes. They are differentially expressed along the axis of the embryo,
which causes its division into segments. Homeotic genes endow segments with different provisions.
Therefore, segmentation genes: installation of segments; homeotic genes: equipment of segments.
Segmentation genes in Drosophila and humans
Mutations in gap genes produce embryos that are lacking groups of
consecutive segments. Mutations in pair-rule genes produce embryos
that are lacking every 2nd proto-segment. Cleidocranial dysplasia
(CCD), an autosomal dominant defect, is caused by mutations in
RUNX2, a human pair-rule gene. Among other defects, the fontanelle
does not close, and collarbones are not formed in affected people.
Homeotic genes are activated after the expression of segmentation genes and determine which
structures (e.g., extremities) will be formed in each particular body segment of adult animals.
Mutations in these genes are called homeotic mutations. In Drosophila, there exist 2 clusters of
homeotic genes on chromosome 3, the antennapedia complex (responsible for the endowment of
segments in the head and the anterior thorax) and the Bithorax complex (responsible for the
101
posterior thorax and the abdomen). Homeotic genes resemble
each other by possessing a conserved 180bp nucleotide
sequence, the "homeobox". Therefore, they are termed
homeobox (HOX) genes.
Homeotic mutations can cause the formation of extremities in
the wrong segments, e.g., in Drosophila legs instead of antennas
or wings instead of balancers.
Interestingly, the order of genes along the chromosome corresponds to the sequence of body
segments for which they are responsible for. Is this by accident? A similar arrangement of HOX genes
is seen in humans, although vertebrates possess 4 HOX gene clusters. In humans, mutations in
HOXD13 cause synpolydactyly (SPD), which is characterized by abnormal bone formations in hands
and feet and ensuing extra fingers or toes.
Example of developmental genes in plants: organ identity genes in flower development of
Arabidopsis
The ABC-Model: Mutant studies suggested that the activity of 3 genes
determines which whorl* (segment) will be endowed with what features.
When gene A is active, sepals are developed. Petals are developed when
gene A and gene B are active. Stamens are developed when gene B and
gene C are active. When only gene C is active, carpels are developed. Gene A
and gene C are antagonists and suppress each other. If one of them fails, the
other one is active. Thus, due to the failure of some of the genes, the
information of where within the flower a certain whorl needs to be is faulty,
and wrong organs are formed. Somewhat divergent models can explain the
differentiation of flower organs in other plant genera. The homeotic genes
of animals and organ identity genes of plants are not homologous. They are
analogous systems that evolved independently in the plant and animal
kingdoms.
Quantitative genetics
Quantitative genetics studies the heritable components of gradually (i.e., continuously/steadily)
varying (i.e., quantitative traits). Part of the heritable traits are discrete (either-or, e.g., hairline,
shape of earlobes* in humans) and follow simple Mendelian inheritance. However, by far most of the
traits are quantitative (e.g., body height, hair colour). At the beginning of the 20th century, the multigene hypothesis was proposed. It states that the cumulative effects of multiple genes cause
phenotype continuity of quantitative traits. Thus, quantitative traits are
polygenic and, in addition, can be influenced by external (environmental)
factors.
Quantitative differences in heritable traits are mostly due to the interaction of
multiple genes (polygeny). Inheritance of each of these genes follows
Mendel´s laws. A simplified model of polygenic inheritance of a trait uses the
example of the human skin colour. 3 different genes each with a dark and a
pale allele can produce 7 shades of skin colour. Additional shading is caused
102
by multiallely and modifications, resulting in stepless variation of skin colour. Multiallely means that
more than 2 alleles of a gene can be present in a population. Modifications are non-heritable
differences caused by environmental effects, such as exposure to sun. Over 50 genes contribute to
the inheritance of body height in humans.
Proof of the multi-gene hypothesis of quantitative
inheritance
The appearance of 5 classes of different grain colours
(from dark reddish to pale) in the F2 of wheat can be
explained by the additive contribution of 2
independently segregating genes (each with a dark and a
pale allele) for grain pigmentation.
The variability of quantitative traits can have heritable
and/or non-heritable components
Quantitative differences in a trait using the example of petal colour of Castilleja hispada (heritable).
The modification of the trait flower colour in hydrangeas is due to the salinity of the soil (nonheritable).
The phenotypic valley
The expression of a quantitative trait usually follows a normal distribution.
Phenotypic variability of a trait between individuals is a combination of
heritable and environmental components. The phenotypic variance is a
quantitative measure (the statistical spread) of variability. The phenotypic
(total) variance (VP) consists of genotypic variance (VG) and environmental
variance (VE).
Estimating the heritable proportion of the variability of phenotypes in a population (heritability)
Heritability refers to the contribution of genetic factors to the total phenotypic variation within a
population. Knowledge of the heritability of a trait is crucial for clinical genetics and animal and plant
breeding. High heritability of a multifactorial trait means that most of the variation is due to genetic
factors and little to environmental effects. The heritable proportion H of phenotypic variance can be
estimated by scoring a large number of individuals of a population under constant environmental
conditions. 𝐻 =
𝑉𝐺
𝑉𝑃
…H=heritability, VG=genotypic variance, VP=phenotypic variance (important
formula). Heritability of a trait is between 0 and 1. Values close to 1 indicate that environmental
influences play a small role. Very few quantitative traits have values of 1 (Example: eye colour?) or 0,
meaning that most often both genetics and environment have an effect on the phenotype. For the
members of a clone, e.g., vegetatively propagated plants, phenotypic variance VP should be almost
identical to environmental variance VE, since there is hardly any genotypic variance (VG=0, i.e., H=0).
Heritability in humans – twin studies
In humans, the study of monozygotic (MZ) twins that had grown up under different conditions, has
proved useful for the assessment of the heritability of multifactorial diseases and traits, e.g., heart
and coronary diseases, type 1/2 diabetes, schizophrenia. They all have a heritable and an
environmental/lifestyle-dependent component. Note, the assumption that MZ twins are genetically
identical is only partially true. Even at birth, genotypes may differ with respect to the number of
multicopy genes. Replication errors may cause different somatic mutations. Also, alleles of
mitochondrial genes may be present in different proportions. Moreover, female MZ twins differ with
respect to their locally active X-chromosomes → somatic mosaicism. Finally, epigenetic modifications
(DNA methylation or histone modification) may alter gene expression and contribute to phenotypic
differences between MZ twins.
103
QTLs and GWAS
Quantitative trait loci (QTLs) are chromosomal loci harbouring genes that contribute to a quantitative
trait. QTLs can be mapped by crossing of true-breeding lineages showing opposite extreme
phenotypes for the trait of interest (e.g., in plants: large seeds – small seeds, drought tolerant –
drought sensitive). The F1 is selfed or backcrossed, and F2 individuals expressing extreme
phenotypes are screened for correlations with linked DNA marker sequences. This requires the
screening of a large number of progeny and elaborate statistical testing. In humans, genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) compare the genomes of large cohorts of patients and healthy person
controls to identify genes contributing to quantitative traits. The genomes of carriers of a certain
trait/disease are scored common recurrent combinations of allelic DNA sequences, the QTLs.
Principle of GWAS
Sequencing of the human genome triggered a surge of GWAS publications
By 2016 over 1000 GWAS had been published that associated around 150 human clinical traits with
around 3000 genetic marker loci. Similar studies have been performed in crop plants where variants
at genetic loci are associated with commercially important traits such as seed size or draught
resistance.
Population genetics
Population genetics studies the incidence of alleles and their distribution to individuals within a
population, and intraspecific evolution. It gave rise to the synthetic theory of evolution by finding
that Mendel´s laws of heredity not only apply at the level of individuals but also to whole
populations. The synthetic theory of evolution is a synthesis of knowledge from mutation research,
Mendel´s laws and Darwin´s evolution theory. It originated by the middle of the 20th century from
work by August Weismann, Theodosius Dobzhansky, Ernst Mayr and Julian Huxley. It is the nowadays
generally accepted theory of evolution. It states that random mutations generate novel traits that
are inherited according to Mendel´s laws. Selection for certain traits (following Darwin) least to
alteration and diversity of creatures.
Example of the inheritance of a trait in a population
Incidence of 2 alleles in scarlet tiger moths sampled from a wild
population.
104
Allele frequencies in the gametes and genotype frequencies in F2
The frequency of alleles in the individuals of a population equals
that in their gametes. Genome frequencies follow the
distribution: A1
2 + 2A1A2 + A2
2 = 1, or generally speaking, the
binominal ratio of the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium: p2 + 2pq + q2
= 1.
The Hardy-Weinberg law
The Hardy-Weinberg Law (after Godfrey H. Hardy and Wilhelm Weinberg, early 20th century)
describes the behaviour of alleles and genotypes in an ideal population (characteristics of the ideal
population: all Individuals are diploid, sexual propagation prevails, panmixias* is the case (no limits
to sexual intermixing of all individuals within the population - except
for the same sex), Medel´s laws are in force, the population is
sufficiently (ideally infinitely) large). It makes 2 predictions. 1st, allele
frequencies and allele distribution (i.e., genotypes) remain constant
in subsequent generations. 2
nd for 2 alleles A and a of a gene, the
ratio of genotypes AA:Aa:aa is p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1 in a randomly mating
population where p=frequency of allele A, q=frequency of allele a.
Populations obeying these predictions are said to be in HardyWeinberg equilibrium.
On the image you can see the graphical representation of the HardyWeinberg law. The frequencies of alleles and genotypes remain
constant from generation to generation.
Relationship between the genotype- and allele-frequencies following the Hardy-Weinberg equation
If for a gene with 2 alleles the frequency of 1 allele is known, the
frequency of genotypes (i.e., allele distribution) can be calculated
using the Hardy-Weinberg equation. Among other things, the
frequency of heterozygous carriers of congenital diseases can be
estimated, if the frequency of affected individuals is known.
Moreover, the Hardy-Weinberg law allows one to determine
whether and how fast a population is evolving.
While an individual possesses only at most 2 different alleles of
any gene, numerous alleles may be present in the gene pool of a
population. The frequency of genotypes for multiple alleles of
given frequencies can be calculated using the Hardy-Weinberg
equation with additional variables: (p + q + r)2 = p2 + q2 + r
2 + 2pq
+ 2pr + 2qr = 1.
Allele frequencies in the gametes and genotype frequencies for 4
alleles of a gene in a population. The number of genotypes G for a
number of a alleles is calculated as 𝐺 =
𝑎∗(𝑎+1)
2
. This can be continued
with as many alleles as wanted.
Microevultion
Microevolution occurs if allele frequencies and allele distribution
(genotypes) change over generations, i.e., a population is not in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (no
stable allele frequency in a generation). Microevolution is the change of allele and genotype
frequencies within a population, whereas macroevolution is the origin of species and higher
taxonomic entities such as genera and families.
There is not a clear cause of microevolution, there are several (image next page).
105
Natural selection (adaptive)
An example is the observation and expectation
of the sickle cell-allele. According to the HardyWeinberg law, selection should be against the
sickle-cell anaemia.
Genetic drift (non-adaptive)
Due to random chance, some seeds will not grow
(drift). The bottleneck effect is when there are different
alleles and 1 of them is rare. Due to random chance,
that allele can be lost, e.g., cheetahs (most of them
died during the ice age and only ~5-10 survived – small
genetic diversity). The founder effect is when that rare
allele comes through, due to random chance, and is
now more prevalent than before.
Difference between selection and drift
A hypothetical example is used. In the case of selection, selection pressure
acts on a trait. In the case of drift, a population passes through a bottleneck
and a random allele remains. Possible example of genetic drift in 2 species of
African perches*. No selective pressure is known that might have caused the
different patterns.
Non-random mating (selective value unclear)
In the case of a strong preference for homogeneous mating or autogamy
(self-fertilization), i.e., AA  AA, aa  aa and Aa  Aa, the proportion of
heterozygotes would decrease because AA  AA and aa  aa produce only
homozygous progeny and heterozygous matings Aa  produce only 50%
heterozygous progeny. This does not alter allele frequency,
but allele distribution among the members of a population.
This could be of a disadvantage for the population because
heterozygosity of individuals is often beneficial. Also, sexual
selection/female partner choice (the choice of a mating
partner is always made by the partner with the higher investment into reproduction) leads to nonrandom mating. Female partner choice would be adaptive per se but may be deleterious for a
population due to female preference for partners with monstrous secondary sexual characteristics
such as impedimentary antlers* or plumage*.
106
Mutation (non-adaptive)
Rare alleles are mainly found in heterozygous individuals.
Therefore, selection can hardly act on rare recessive
alleles. New mutations rather take hold in small, isolated
populations (at the fringe of the distribution area of a
species), where they are present more often in
homozygous condition. An example is, if the frequency of allele a in a population is 10%, only 1% of
individuals will be homozygous aa. 18% will be heterozygous Aa, the remaining 81% will be AA.
Another example is if a new allele emerges in the smallest conceivable population of only 2
individuals (due to mutation or the founder effect), half of
the F1 individuals will be heterozygous. From F2
(grandchildren) on, 6% of individuals will be homozygous for
this allele. These may be subject to selection. Thus, selection
works better in small, isolated populations. Since genetic
drift is more efficient in small populations as well,
microevolution rather occurs in small populations.
Microevolution leads to the origin of races
Crossing barriers allows speciation
Here, allopatric speciation is shown. This is the geographical
separation as a crossing barrier – the 2 populations are
separated by the Grand Canyon. Sympatric speciation is the
formation of new species within the distribution area of the
founding species. In this case, chromosomal rearrangements
form the crossing barrier.
Origin of races and species
The following image shows a simplified summary of factors
contributing to the origin of races and species.
107
Vocabulary
Lecture 1:
progeny = Nachkommen
erratically = ungleichmäßig
propagation = Fortpflanzung
pertain = betreffen
toadflax = Leinkraut
evening primrose = Nachtkerze
induct = einführen
roundworm = Fadenwurm
propagate = verbreiten
ciliate = Wimperntierchen
clover leaf = Kleeblatt
handedness = Händigkeit
Lecture 2:
progenitor = Vorläufer
cohesion = Zusammenhalt
catenation = Verbindung
precocious = frühzeitig
meristematic = meristematisch (teilungsfähig)
transiently = vorübergehend
stably = stabil
stillbirth = Todgeburt
congenital = angeboren
ensue = erfolgen
Lecture 3:
diffraction = Beugung
flank = angrenzen
screwing = Verschraubung
traverse = durchlaufen, durchqueren
excise = herausschneiden
consensus = übereinstimmend
Lecture 4:
thereof = davon
residue = Rest
fission = Spaltung
intercalation = Interkalation (reversible Einlagerung von Ionen)
revertant = Revertant, Rückmutant
proneness = Anfälligkeit
encompass = umfassen
resect = herausschneiden
Lecture 5:
insinuate = andeuten
108
elicit = hervorrufen
tonicity = Tonizität (Maß für den Unterschied im osmotischen Druck)
Lecture 6:
polycistronic = polycistronisch/polygenisch (mRNA, die von mehreren hintereinandergelegenen
Cistrons codiert wird)
basal = grundleged
vicinity = Nähe, Umgebung
decamp = aufbrechen
calico cat = Glückskatze
Lecture 7:
methodology = Methodik
ascertain = feststellen
Lecture 8:
duplex = doppelt
computationally = rechnerisch
transfect = einschleusen
Lecture 9:
contig = Contig (Set überlappender DNA-Stücke)
precipitate = in dem Kontext: herauslösen/herausschneiden
reconcile = etw. abstimmen/zusammenführen/schlichten
immunoprecipitation = Immunpräzipation (mithilfe eines Antikörpers ein Antigen aus einer Lösung
konzentrieren)
Lecture 10:
constriction = Einengung
germline = Keimbahn
vigor [Am] = Kraft, Lebenskraft
sloughed off = abgelöst
chorionic = chorional (Chorion ist Teil der Fruchtblase)
nuchal = nackenabwärts
Lecture 11:
aberrant = irrtümlich
pedigree = Stammbaum
titer = Titer (Maß für die Anzahl bestimmter Antikörper im Blut)
Lecture 12:
hallmark = Kennzeichen
evade = ausweichen
cervical cancer = Gebärmutterhalskrebs
efficacy = Wirksamkeit
Lecture 13:
seldom = selten
endow = ausstatten
109
spoon worm = Igelwurm
truncate = kürzen
Lecture 14:
homeotic = homöotisch (Gene, die im Falle ihrer Mutation dazu führen, dass Organstrukturen
teilweise oder vollständig umgewandelt werden)
whorl = Kringel/Wirbel
earlobe = Ohrläppchen
panmixia = Panmixie (Mischung guter und schlechter Erbanalagen)
perch = Barsch
antler = Geweih
plumage = Gefieder
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)